





Bible Truth
and
My Desire




By S E Copeland






Elder Harold Hunt
P O Box 5352
Maryville TN 37802

PART ONE

To the Church at Little Branch and Her Friends, Greetings;

Many years ago your most unworthy servant (if one) was impressed with a desire to write of the things pertaining to God's Church and people. Whether that impression was from Him, or whether He gave me that one little talent I know not, yet sometimes through the years I have enjoyed trying to use it. But most of the time it seems I have kept my talent buried, if I had one. And now I am growing old (in my 70th year) and have not much time left. So this may be my dying message to you, my beloved brethren and sisters. God has been wonderfully good to us in these last days of my unprofitable life by adding to our numbers such as should be saved, and blessing us to build a nice, new house of worship in His name. Without his great blessing we poor ones could never have built it in this trying time of wars. Therefore all credit, honors and praise is His due, not ours. So now shall we use it to His Glory, or to our own shame?

0, that we might adopt the prayer of Solomon at the dedication of the temple as our own and the Lord be with us to own and bless as we serve Him. I Kings 8:22-61, also Nehemiah, chapter 1. Let us try as best we can to do this, and then "forsake not the assembling of ourselves together as the manner of some is," (Heb. 10:25) but be diligent in meeting often in His service. It will be good for us all to read and heed the whole chapter, Heb. 10. I wish that every member of our church would read and study the scripture so that every one should know the truth of the Bible. "Study to shew thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth not be ashamed, rightly dividing (or applying) the word of truth." II Tim. 2-15. This will apply to us all from the youngest (little Mary) to the oldest. And by doing this diligently we may always know how to behave ourselves in the house of God. I Tim. 3:15.

If every one would be awake and up with his job of learning we would all know the fundamental principles of the Bible, Baptist doctrine and practice. We would know when a man preached or advocated any heresy, and we would know to admonish him the first and second time, then reject and exclude him from our church fellowship. Titus 3:10-11. If we know our Bible, we may be able to handle any case that may come up in or before our church. "All scripture is given by the inspiration of God and is profitable," . . . and a thorough furnisher to the man of God for every good work. II Tim. 3:16-17. Timothy had known the scripture from a child and he, being a preacher, was an example for the flock of God, the Church, to follow after. Read I Peter, 5th chapter and other scriptures, many others, and in reading, always be sure to notice who the writer or speaker is, to whom he is writing or speaking, and what the subject is, that which he is writing or speaking about. And just as soon as you, or any one of you, finds a single verse where Jesus told a dead alien sinner to do any thing whatsoever in order to get or have eternal life, please show it to me before I die. I am not expecting to see it, because it is not in the Bible, and as we have already seen the Bible is a thorough furnisher. It teaches us that all men died in Adam, just as God warned Adam in the garden before he ate that forbidden fruit, and so we all in nature are "dead in trespasses and sins." (Romans 3rd and 5th chapters) And will forever remain so, unless regenerated and born again by the Spirit and power of God. (See Jesus to Nicodemus, John 3rd chapter, and other scriptures.)

And it teaches that God chose before the foundation of this world a people out of this fallen race and gave them to His Son, their Saviour, to be redeemed by Him from their fallen, dead state and made children of God, fit to dwell with Him in all eternity. He gave them to Him out of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people on the earth and that includes the heathen and the uttermost parts of the earth. (See 2nd Psalm, Revelation, and other scriptures.) And all that the Father gave to Him will (shall) come to Him in regeneration, and none that come will ever fall away and be lost. Read and study John, 6th and 8th chapters; Romans, 8; Ephesians, lst and 2nd chapters, and many more. Those thus born of, and brought to, God, are the ones to whom the fatherly teachings and admonitions of the Scriptures are addressed; the ones to whom it applies. Those that Jesus came and saved, His disciples, and all others saved by Him who should be His disciples. He saves many that do not, or have not yet followed Him as true disciples.

Many children of God are not Christians, because they do not follow Christ in His precepts and examples. They do not obey Him; do not keep His commandments. Read and study His great sermon on the mount, (Matt. 5, 6, 7 chapters,) and then look about us and see how many (or how very few) seek first the kingdom or church of God and His righteousness, believing His saying that all of these other (necessary) things shall be added unto us. See how far short about all of us fall! That whole wonderful sermon is addressed to His disciples. Read and see. All addressed to and for the children of God. He has never commanded any alien sinner to do anything in His kingdom (church) nor to do anything to get into it. He cannot see to do anything because he is dead. "Except a man be born again he cannot see the kingdom." John 3. And in the birth he is just as active as he is in letting the wind blow where and when it pleases, no more so. Also notice closely how Paul and the other apostles address their epistles of love and instructions. Not one of them addressed to dead alien sinners, but all to God's children,

His chosen and redeemed people, just as in the old scriptures all were addressed to national Israel, chosen of God from among the nations because He loved them. See Deuteronomy, 7th chapter.

Let's begin now with Romans. "Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an apostle, separated unto the gospel of God," etc. "To all that be in Rome, beloved of God, called to be saints; grace to you and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ." He tells first who he is, and what he is, what he is writing about, and to whom he is writing—to every one in Rome that is beloved of God and called to be a saint or child of God. Read and study the first eight verses and see that I say the truth.

Now First Corinthians: "Paul, called to be an apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ through the will of God, and Sosthenes our brother, unto the church of God which is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus," etc. Not one word addressed to dead alien sinners, but all to the church and those called to be saints. Likewise we find Second Corinthians. "Paul, an apostle by the will of God, and Timothy, his brother preacher, unto the church at Corinth, and to all of the saints in all Achaia." All children of God.

Now Galatians. The same Paul writing and telling us that he is an apostle, not of men, nor by man, but of and by Jesus and the Father God, and all of the brethren that were with him, unto the churches in Galatia.

Ephesians: Paul, the same apostle "to the saints which are at Ephesus, and to the faithful in Christ Jesus." 

Philippians: "Paul and Timotheus, the servants of Jesus Christ, to all the saints which are at Philippi, with the bishops and deacons." Nothing yet to any but children of God. 

Colossians: "Paul and Timotheus to the saints and faithful brethren in Christ at Colosse." 

Thessalonians: "Paul and Silvanus and Timotheus, unto the church of the Thessalonians, which is in God the Father and in the Lord Jesus Christ." Saved and safe. 

Second Thessalonians: The same three elders to the same church in God the Father, and in Christ Jesus. First to Timothy, the same apostle by the same authority and hope, "Unto Timothy, my own son in the faith." 

Second Timothy is another letter from the same father to the same beloved son. Next the same Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ, etc. (Verses one to four.) To Titus, another of his sons after the common faith. That is, the faith common to all of the true church of God.

Then his short letter to Philemon is addressed in a little different words: "Paul, a prisoner of Jesus Christ, and Timothy our brother, unto Philemon, our dearly beloved and fellow-labourer, and to our beloved Apphia, and Archippus our fellow soldier, and to the church, in thy house: Grace to you, and peace, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus, Christ." All children of God; all in his family or church.

Now let's find who is addressed by the apostle in Hebrews. "God, who in time past spake in divers manners to the fathers by the prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by His Son," etc. Who are "us?" Read carefully on down to the third chapter and see that he is addressing "holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling."  Natural, dead alien sinners are not "holy brethren" nor "partakers of the heavenly calling." So it is easy to see that the apostle's letter to the Hebrews is also written to none other than spiritual children of God. Likewise the general epistle of "James, a servant of God and, of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes which are scattered abroad, greeting."

See all through the five chapters of his letter how often and lovingly he calls them""brethren," and how wonderfully good his teaching that the man of God or church today may be thoroughly furnished to every, good work.

Next, Peter writes to some strangers scattered throughout out Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, who has "begotten us again unto a lively hope." Sounds like a good Old Baptist preacher writing to God's children, doesn't he? Also his second epistle has the same certain sound, not uncertain. John in his first letter declares something to his "little children," his "brethren," as you can see by reading on into the second chapter, and in the third chapter "us, the sons of God!" His second is to the "elect lady and her chi1dren, whom I love in the truth, and not I only, but also all they that have known the truth, for the truth's sake, which dwelleth in us, and shall be with us forever." 

Third letter, "The elder unto the well beloved Gaius, whom I love in the truth." We just could not tell him from an Old Baptist, if met them together in the road.

Jude, another servant of Jesus Christ, wrote "to them that are sanctified by God the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ, and called." Some different these are from those described in Romans, third and fifth chapters. These are created anew and preserved in Jesus Christ while those are still dead in trespasses and sins. And lastly, the Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto Him to show unto His servants things which must shortly come to pass; and He sent and signified it by His angel unto His servant, John, who then addressed the Lord's people thusly:" John to the seven churches which are in Asia; Grace be unto you, and peace, from Him which is, and which was, and which is to come; and from the seven Spirits which are before his throne, and from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness, and the first begotten of the dead, and the Prince of the kings of the earth, Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and hath made us kings and priests unto God and his Father; to Him be glory and dominion forever and ever. Amen." 

All written by the servants of God to God's people, His children, those born of Him. Not of man, nor the will of man, but of God. See John 1:13. Now, children, (and grown-ups as well) go back and read carefully every scripture letter and book referred to, and see if I am not right in my teaching. I want you, each and everyone, to know the truth of God's Book, and be free from error and every false way, and be able to defend the truth against all false teachers. And, by all means, I would that our young and student members get this fact firmly fixed in your minds; that in reading the Scriptures, where ever and whenever there are any conditions to be met or complied with by men (us), anything whatsoever that we may be required to do for reward, or to attain to any end for our good and welfare, then that applies here in time, to what we call our time salvation, saving us from timely hurts, harms, and dangers.

The Scriptures teach us that there is a timely salvation to be worked out by us as children of our heavenly Father, (Philippians 2:12) just as surely as it teaches salvation by grace, eternal salvation. Eternal salvation is the work of God alone, and we do not, and cannot, have anything whatsoever to do with or in working it out, but after the Lord saves us with an ever lasting or eternal salvation, then we can, and by all means should, do much to work out our salvation as children of God here in time, ever keeping in mind that our good work is only for time and timely benefits, joys and pleasures while we live here. 

Eternal salvation is not by works of righteousness which we have, may or can do. Jesus alone does that saving. Titus 3:5. And He will save all the Father gave Him with an everlasting salvation. John 6:37. He chose His people out of the fallen race of Adam before time, (Eph. 1:4) foreknew them, and He calls them according to His eternal purpose, predestinated them to be conformed to the image of His Son, and those He called He justified and glorified. Romans eighth chapter. 

All completed by Him. We had no hand, will or wish in it, but now, since He has done so much for us, our part is to "obey God and keep His commandments, for this is our whole duty. Eccl. 12:13. Let us now as obedient children of God, work out our time salvation according to the will of Him that saved us with an eternal salvation. And, if we do this, we will do all that Jesus tells us in the four books of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, to do, and all that He tells us by His apostles in all the rest of the New Testament, keeping always in mind that they furnish us with everything that we need to know, believe and practice religiously. 2 Tim. 3:16, 17. If we will read, study, and do as they say, we may save ourselves and others of God's little children from many hurtful things, false ways, false doctrines, and such like that would hinder us from enjoying our life in God's church and service as He wills that we should.

It is not the greatest amount of reading that does us the most good, but what we learn by what we do read. Therefore, let's think and study well the things we read about and be sure to get the meaning, and the lesson taught in what we read. If I read forty chapters a day, paying no attention; not thinking on what I read, I am not benefitted and may as well not read at all. It is best to read slowly, and study as we read, getting the lesson taught firmly fixed in our minds as we go. (First Tim. 4:15, 16.) 

Our young members should do a lot of this now while you are young, and your minds are active. You can learn more and faster, and retain what you learn much better, than if you wait until you are old, and your minds become inactive as your bodies grow feebler. When I first read the Bible in my teen age I could learn faster, memorize much of the Scriptures, and retain it in my young mind so much easier than now at nearly three score and ten.

Now, since our whole duty is to obey God and keep His commandments, what are His commandments? Jesus said the first of all is "Hear, 0 Israel; the Lord our God is one Lord; and thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength." Who is it He tells to do this? Israel, Spiritual Israel, not dead sinners. See Mark 12th chapter. 

And the second, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." How many of us obey these two? If our home in Heaven depended upon our strict obedience in the letter and in the spirit where would we be in the end? 

Now, let's go back to Exodus, the twentieth chapter, and see the original ten commandments. These were given to national Israel which was a type of spiritual Israel, or the true church of Jesus Christ, later to be set up "in the days of these kings." (Read the book of Daniel and see.) 

None of them were given that His chosen nation should gain eternal Heaven by keeping them, but for their good health, happiness and prosperity, while they lived here in this time in the land that flowed with milk and honey—plenty good to eat to sustain natural life, just as there is plenty in His true church in this gospel day to sustain and satisfy spiritual life for all of His obedient spiritual children.

1. "Thou shalt have no other gods before me." Idol gods He means, spelled with a little "g." Not the true and living God. And we may well begin now to search diligently within and see if we are not serving other than the true and living God. Primitive Baptists serving idols, or idol gods? Yes, it is a deplorable fact that many of us do. Anything except strictly providential occurrences that we let come between us and His and our church services is an idol god. Anything that we let hinder us from seeking first His kingdom or church and His righteousness. Any trust we may put in man whether our own works or those of another man, or men, for life and salvation in the eternal world is making an idol god of man or men. 

"Cursed be the man that trusteth in man and maketh flesh his arm," etc. Read Jeremiah 17th chapter. Anything that we worship and seek after more than after God is an idol. 

It is a deplorable fact that some Old Baptists make a god of money-getting; just the same as other men do.

2. "Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image or any likeness of anything that is in heaven above or that is in the earth beneath," etc. We have all seen men-made pictures and likenesses of wooden crosses and human beings struggling in the sea or on land trying to get to them for eternal salvation. Or supposed pictures of Jesus standing with His arms extended inviting "unsaved" sinners to come unto Him. Or pictures of "Virgin Mary" (and other "saints") with people on their knees in worship of her. You find all such in the literature and books of anti-christian religious orders, such as Catholic Rome and all of her harlot daughters and grand-daughters all over so-called Christendom.  All such "worship", is heathenish or worse, for heathens, many of them who never heard of Christ Jesus do ignorantly worship "the Great Spirit," which Mary worshipers and others who trust in man do not worship at all. 

No man on earth knows what Jesus, nor Mary were like in this life, so how can we know that the pictures we saw are true likenesses of them? This was kept from men by a wise Creator, for we are not to worship Him by sight, but in faith with the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which in the sight of God is of great price. So all that worship pictures and statues, are anti-christian idolaters.

3. "Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh His name in vain."  So to be free from guilt we must be careful how we use God's name. If we curse and swear, as Peter did one night, we may expect to "go out and weep bitterly." We may lose our place and standing in the house, cr church of God. (Matthew 26:74, 75 and other places.)

4., "Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy," etc. Verses 8 to 11 inclusive. Do we keep it holy?. By "we" I mean Old Baptists. Do we all go to the house of God and engage in His services every Sabbath, or do we often go to other places and do many things that the Lord forbids us doing, forsaking the assembling of ourselves together in His services? Yes, sad to say, some do, but I try to thank God for a great awakening in our little church band.

5. "Honor thy father and thy mother; that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee." We hear this called the first commandment with promise. It seems that some Old Baptists, and nearly the whole world besides, have forgotten this one, and the one regarding the keeping of the holy Sabbath.

6. "Thou shalt not kill."

7. "Thou shalt not commit adultery."

8. "Thou shalt not steal."

These last three quoted, all short, positive, "thou shalt nots." No promise of reward for keeping them, as in the fifth commandment, and yet there is great reward in so doing. Both moral and spiritual reward, all while we live here in time. The breaking of them all, or any one of them cannot, nor will not, be tolerated in the kingdom or church of God. Those who do so have no inheritance in the church of God. See Galatians 5:19, 20, 21, or whole chapter. We are persuaded better things of our beloved and God-blest little band; that we may keep a clean house.

9. "Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor." We are apt to think of a neighbor as one that lives near us in the same community, 'but that is hot the only meaning of the word. It also means any fellow human being. Therefore, we are forbidden or commanded not to tell a lie on any human being, not to bear false witness at all. John said, "I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk in truth." His third letter.

10. "Thou shalt not covet anything that is thy neighbor's." (See verse 17 for full quotation). "Covet" means in this sense, to desire inordinately; to long for 
unlawfully; to have, or to satisfy an extreme desire. Webster. And covetousness means by the same authority, a strong or inordinate desire of obtaining and possessing some supposed good; usually in a bad sense, and applied to an inordinate desire of wealth. This tenth and last of God's ten commandments to His chosen people forbids it, and then He said by His great apostle Paul, that it is idolatry. Eph. 5:5 and Col. 3:5.

"Covetousness, which is idolatry." Now I have sometimes thought that probably more Old Baptists break this last more than any other of the ten commandments. Just look around you and see how many, how very many, do neglect their church and the things pertaining to the kingdom to go after filthy lucre, serving the god of money-getting (or mammon) instead of serving God by close attendance on their meeting days and church services. You cannot serve both God and mammon or riches. Jesus said so, and He also said "Seek ye first the kingdom of God," and if we do that He has promised to add to us the other things. Not all of them that our covetous natures may want, but what we need of them.

Paul says that no covetous man who is an idolater hath any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God. Then what if Old Baptist churches were as strict in discipline as they should be? Some would most surely be put out for their covetousness, their idolatry. Solomon, the wise man said he that hateth covetousness shall prolong his days. Could that mean that he will live longer in this world than he otherwise would live? No, but live longer in the enjoyment of home in the church and church privileges. Godliness with contentment is great gain. And having the necessities of life, let us therewith be content to seek diligently to do our church duties and services to our God who has so abundantly blest us in our recent efforts and labors in His kingdom. "The love of money is the root of all evil; which while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows." Read all of 1st Tim. 6th chapter. "But thou, 0 man of God, flee these things; and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness. Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life whereunto thou art also called, and hast professed a good profession before many witnesses." 

We don't get eternal life by any effort of our own while yet in our sins and destitute of it, but having been called unto it by the quickening power of God's Holy Spirit we are to lay hold on it by living in obedience to the honor and glory of God who gave it. Neither is money all that men may and do covet after. See the many things mentioned in the tenth commandment. One might have (and some do have) an inordinate or unlawful desire for his neighbor's fine house, or his livestock, or even his wife. "Anything that is thy neighbor's," all of which is forbidden and condemned. Not to be tolerated in any member of the church of God. "From such withdraw thyself." Covetousness is idolatry. If I squeeze my nickels till the buffalo bellows, and my dollars till the eagle squalls refusing to contribute to the necessary financial expenses of my church, or the cause in general, then I am guilty of covetousness and should be looked after by my church in conference and promptly dealt with, if I refuse to mend my ways. See the type, Jeremiah 7th chapter. If I refuse to contribute to my faithful pastor of my carnal things after he has fed me with the spiritual things God gave him for me I am guilty of covetousness, and if I try to justify my covetousness by spiritualizing (I Cor. 9:14) to make it mean that, the preacher is to "live" on the gospel which he feeds me, just as I "live" on it, then I am guilty of more covetousness. Just plain idolatry. Some might argue that they are too poor to give anything. Who is poorer than one widow who gave two mites, all that she had?

But God's perfect plan for financing the church fixes all of that perfectly. "Now concerning the collection for the saints, as I have given order to the churches of Galatia, even so do ye. Upon the first day of the week let every one of you lay by him in store as God hath prospered him, that there be no gatherings when I come." I Cor. 16.

He had already given this order to the churches, in Galatia, and now he is giving the same order to the church at Corinth and to Little Branch, and to every other church of His planting even down to the end of time. Now who is to lay by in store? Every one of you. Every member in the church at Corinth. Every member in the church at Little Branch, or in any other, and how much for each member? Do all have to give the same or an equal amount? No ! Not that way, but as God has prospered you, all on perfect equality. If He has prospered Brother Smith so that he is well able to give ten dollars or a hundred, and Brother Johnson so that he is only able to give five dollars, or a poor widow that she is not able to give more than ten or twenty-five cents, and they all give honestly as God has prospered them, then one has done his duty and obeyed the command just the same as the others, and all are to be held in equally high esteem and love and fellowship of the whole church.

Everything God does is perfect and this is His perfect plan for financing His church just as He had it laid down by His great inspired apostle. "Upon the first day of the week." I don't think that necessarily means that our laying by must be done on Sunday or Monday only of each week, for we may be so situated that our money or substance comes into our hands only on some other day or days of the week. But I do think it means that our church needs should be our first consideration of our finances just the same as "seeking first the kingdom of God and His righteousness," for this is really a part of it, letting church matters come first.

"Lay by in store that there be no gatherings when I come." This cannot, I think, means that every individual shall lay by, or keep his treasure in a place apart from every other individual member, for then there would necessarily have to be a gathering every time it became necessary to use our church funds. A collection would have to be taken up and such is not contemplated in this perfect plan. Then where is the "store" in which we are told to lay by as God has prospered us? It is such person or persons as those the church may "look out among you" to serve as her financial or business officers. Acts, sixth chapter. If your deacons are anything, then this is a greater part of their duty and work, to hold sacredly in charge, and attend to the financial business of the church.

They should keep a strict account, or correct record, of all that comes into their hands, and be able to show by such record what disposition they have made of all funds leaving their hands. All contributions should be given through their hands, they themselves contributing to the fund just like all the rest, "as the Lord has prospered them." All disbursements should be made in the name of the church, then the pastor, nor any other preacher or persons receiving help, could not have "favorites" in the body, "because Brother Smith gave me five or ten dollars, while Brother Jones refused to give me anything."

If we refuse to give through the hands of our deacons and insist on "handing mine to Brother Preacher myself, so he will know who gave it," then we might do well to make a close examination of self to find out what is wrong with us. Why, 0 why, should I not rather hear our dearly beloved church praised than myself individually? I have just recently been made happy by a good letter received from an able man of God who visited and preached for us. He wrote, "You at Little Branch certainly do have a lovely little band there, and they were so nice and good to undeserving me." Now I would rather hear that any day, than to have the praise myself, and my church looked on as a careless, lifeless, nothing. 

But let's go back. If you are afraid to trust your deacons to handle your funds then you have done the cause a great wrong by putting them in that office, or else there 

is something wrong with you. If they cannot be trusted, put them out of the office and out of the church. If they are of the right sort to be trusted, then get right yourselves and your fear or distrust of them will be gone. 

"As God has prospered him." Who is to be the judge of how the Lord has prospered me, and of how much I should lay by in store? Now we are on something that will search out and expose our inmost soul if we are not careful to shun dishonesty, and to keep covetousness from overtaking us. It might help us to stop here and read some in Acts, 5th chapter. If God has prospered me so that I should lay by in store five dollars and I grudgingly give only fifty cents, thus pretending, or saying that I am not able to give any more than that, what am I guilty of ? You know, and my guilty conscience will know, that I am guilty of downright covetousness, and that I have lied to both God and man. 

Truly God's word and law does search out our poor depraved hearts and minds. "The soul that sinneth, it shall die." Death does not always mean corporal death nor eternal death. If the law of discipline should sometime be enforced to the fullest, some Old Baptists might die to their (or our) church privileges. When you appointed your deacons over "this business" (Acts 6) they became your official treasurers or trustees of your church funds and goods other than money that may be given for the poor and unfortunate and for the pastors, and other ministering servants, whom the Lord in His wise and merciful providence may send to comfort and build you up in the most Holy faith. 

I said treasurers, and that they are, yet it would scare some few Old Baptists half to death to call them such; therefore, it might cause less fright to just call them trustees, or just plain deacons, and let them do nothing but pass around the bread and wine at communion time. I do not object to their doing that little service, but that is less than half of their job or "business." And here is some more that a few "straight-lean-backers" might get scared at. I feel sure that the book would abundantly justify the deacons in having some intelligent, business-like system in carrying out "this business" of the church for which they were originally appointed. We are taught to "be -not slothful in business," so why not handle our church finances in as intelligent, business-like way as we would our own personal affairs ?

To do all in a business way, and that we may know at any and all times just how we stand let the deacons have a checking account at the bank, where they may deposit all moneys handed in to them by the church and friends, and let them disburse said funds by check to pastor, or to the poor of the flock, or for whatever they in their judgment deem a worthy case, or as they might be directed by the church. The account being run in the name of the church, Little Branch, and all checks to be signed by one or more deacons as trustees of funds. By this system we would know where all the money went and the purpose for which it was spent and we would know whether our pastor or other servant came at his own expense, or had been permitted to reap a little of our carnal things after sowing unto us the God-given, soul-cheering spiritual things. By this Bible plan and system the members (and others who might care to give) all laying by in store in the hands of your deacons from time to time, not waiting to be called upon for their contributions, but voluntarily, as God has prospered them, the deacons would always have on hand sufficient funds for ordinary needs so that there would not have to be first a "gathering" or public call for money.

I am thinking now just how wonderful it would be to see one Old Baptist church working in full obedience, strict accord and harmony with the plain teaching of the scriptures. If I am right let us try the plan. If I am wrong show me by the Bible and I will gladly give it up. I want us all to read, study, and practice, all that is taught in the eighth and ninth chapters of both Corinthians. There is where we may learn in a fuller sense our duty to our pastors, and other preaching servants, and many other things we need to know and do. I might write a little book on these two ninth chapters, but I rather you all read and get them first hand. Don't pass over them hurriedly and lightly but study and get the lessons taught in all you read.

Our little church body was for a long time near death's door seemingly, but now, thank God, He has given us a new lease on life, and blessed us with renewed energy and strength to press on, we hope, for a long time in His sweet and delightful service. If we humble ourselves He will exalt us. Not make big folks of us, causing us to feel our importance, but He will raise us up in our feelings, causing us to rejoice with great joy in His service. If we exalt ourselves, become puffed up in our vain imaginations, feeling our own importance then He will surely humble us, letting us down so low that we may feel that He has forsaken us forever more. Then our prayer may be, 0 Lord, hast thou clean gone from us forever? The Lord's ways are far above our ways and so different from ours.

Our yoke of bondage and our heavy burdens are more than we can bear. His yoke is easy and His burden light. Our's makes us tired and faint. His rests us from our labor and makes us feel free and easy as we bear it. The more of our works we do, the more tired and burdened we become. The more we do of His bidding the more rested or restful, free and easy, we feel. We might grow in our vanity and estimation of ourselves until we become as big as a puffed lip toad, then suddenly be flattened out as a bursted one, and what would be left of us?

God's way is higher. The more we grow in grace and the knowledge of truth, the less we become in our estimation of ourselves. I enjoy seeing Old Baptists grow when the more they grow, the less (smaller) they become in their feelings and estimation of themselves. This is good for both preachers and laymen. Just let them keep on growing until they grow to be the least in the kingdom, or even less than the least of all saints, as did Paul. That is the only way that any of us could ever become the greatest in the kingdom or church.

Jesus said the least is the greatest. He did not mean the least little child is the greatest, but the man, woman, or child who is least in his own feelings, sees himself less than the least in the sight of God. Poor in spirit, down in the dust of humility, no more than a worm in God's holy sight. He is the greatest.  Matthew 18, and 2 Corinthians 6, 4. Read. Not every one that says unto Him Lord, Lord shall enter into the joys of the kingdom of heaven or church, but he that does the will of the Father. That is to obey God and keep His commandments. Keep in mind that the only heaven men can enter into by their works is a timely heaven. To do this we must "Enter ye in at the strait gate; for wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat; because strait is the gate and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it." 

The strait gate is the narrow, close, strait gate into God's church which is, of course, the Primitive Baptist. It is plenty wide for God's little children to go through into the path of duties, which they owe to Him, but not wide enough for them to take the things of the world in with them. The narrow way corresponds with, or is in harmony with the strait gate. It will not do for us to try to carry the broad and crooked things of the world over it. There would soon be a traffic jam and some one, or ones, getting pinched. It is just wide enough and strait enough (also straight) to lead the few that obey their Master unto life. Not eternal life by their obedience, but the attainment or experience of enjoyment to the fullest, while we live and serve the Lord as obedient children here in our church life. 

The wide gate will admit any and everything even of a worldly nature, and many, very many, go in thereat. The broad way leads to destruction of the peace and happiness of God's many children who go that way, because every abominable thing is carried along with them in that way. Those traveling in both ways I think, are children of God. Dead men, alien unregenerate sinners are inactive, not going in at any gate. God's children have been made alive. The strait gate and narrow way is God's way, the Primitive Baptist Church. The wide gate and broad way is the Arminian way—all men-made institutions or "churches." 

There is a way that seems right unto a man but the end thereof are the ways of death. That same Arminian way. Let us try to not walk in the "ways ." "Stand ye in the ways, and see and ask for the old paths, wherein is the good way and walk therein. The good way is the church kingdom . which was set up by the Lord for His children to walk and dwell in, while they live here in this time world. She is the one that cometh up from the wilderness leaning upon her beloved husband, Jesus the Christ. (Songs 8.) 

The other seven (meaning all of the others) care nothing for Him. Not leaning upon, nor depending upon, Him for their sustenance. , They only want His name (Christian) to take away their reproach since they have so many illegitimate children. Isaiah 4:1.

Note the vast difference between the seven women (churches) and the bride, the true church—Old Baptist. The true woman is humble and dependent, while the seven manifest no humility at all, not dependent, but independent, just want His name. Also note the difference between the children of the true and the false. 

The children of the false have all they want, and don't ask God for anything. Those of the true are beggars for His mercy and grace: See Luke 18. One high and haughty in his feelings, the other humble and poor in spirit. Matt. 5, Luke 15:21.

And here is the spirit of humility manifestly felt, by the truly humble child of God for the true woman or church of God: "Intreat me not to leave thee, or to return from following after thee; for whither thou goest, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I will lodge; thy people shall be my people, and thy God. my God; where thou diest, will I die, and there will: I be buried: the Lord do so to me, and more also, if ought but death part thee and me." One of the most wonderful expressions of the love of the child of God for the mother, or, true church of God! 

Many  years ago, this poor old writer found this beautiful sentiment so sweetly expressed in the little book of Ruth, and it has been the sentiment of my poor heart and food and comfort to my soul through all these years. Read the beautiful story of Ruth, a little book of only four chapters, study it and see if you can find the true meaning of the figure or, lesson taught therein. I cannot explain it as I see it, but it seems to me that Ruth is a-type or figure of the regenerated, born again child of God. hungering and thirsting after righteousness, in love with and longing for, the church of Jesus Christ, and also a type or figure of the new or Gentile church itself coming up out of the wilderness leaning on her beloved. Song of Solomon 6:5.  Naomi, the old or law church going out was the school master bringing us, the Gentile church, to Christ, (Gal., 3:24) of whom Boaz is a type. Note every move and every word of little Ruth acted and spoken in love and deep humility, just like the little hungering and thirsting child of God on the outside looking with longing tear-dimmed eyes over into the church of God, the Primitive Baptist, for she is the Gentile Church married to Christ, the bride of Christ, having been redeemed by Him, as in the type or figure Ruth was redeemed, bought by Boaz, and became his wife. The name Ruth means beauty. And to God's true servants and people there is beauty in every little hungering, thirsting, enquiring child of His, that comes into His gospel field gleaning for some little morsel to satisfy their hungering, and a drink of cool water to quench their thirst. And they are ever ready to encourage one like that and welcome them to glean after His servants (reapers) just as Ruth gleaned after the servants of Boaz.

The Lord himself also comes into the field, takes cognizance of the little hungry, thirsting ones, lovingly welcomes them, and commands His servants to drop not only a few scattered grains but "handfuls on purpose" for them. Boaz being a type of Christ and his field the gospel field, hear the Lord of the harvest as he speaks so 

mercifully, kindly, tenderly to the little gleaner. "Hear my daughter, go not to glean in another field, neither go from hence, but abide here fast by my maidens, and when thou art athirst go to the vessels and drink." 

These and other words of compassion and assurance, that she is welcome and wanted to share with others the blessings and joys of the kingdom. How unworthy and humble this makes the little one feel as down to the ground before Him they bow themselves.

"Why have I found grace in thine eyes, that thou shouldest take knowledge of me, seeing I am a stranger?" Yes, they feel to be "strangers here below" and not worthy to be numbered with the Lord's people in His church kingdom. But read and study the beautiful figure through and see the Lord prove to the little one that He knew more about her than she knew about herself. And now I think of what a heaven on earth it would be if I, and every member of our beloved Little Branch church were a loving, trusting little Ruth! And may I hope and believe that most all are as she was?

Then as Paul admonishes and beseeches the Ephesian brethren, let us at Little Branch walk worthy of the vocation where with we are called, with all lowliness and meekness, with longsuffering, forbearing one another in love; endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bonds of peace. Let us run with patience the race set before us, ever looking unto Jesus the beginner and finisher of our faith. James says for us to count it all joy when we fall into divers temptations; knowing this, that the trying of our faith worketh patience. But let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing. Some of us need more patience, for none of us have as much as poor old Job had. And Peter tells us how to have more patience. How? By giving all diligence to add to our faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge; and to knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience; and to patience godliness; and to godliness brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness charity. For if these be in you, and abound, they make you that ye are neither barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge or our Lord Jesus Christ. But if we lack these things we are blind, and cannot see afar off, and have forgotten that we were purged from our old sins. 

Also if we lack wisdom (and I do), we are told how to have that. Ask of God, that gives to all liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given, if we ask in faith, sincerely without doubting. James and Peter both tell us many things, good for our spiritual health, and growth in obedience and grace. Also Paul in his letter to the Philippian Church, second chapter, and in many other places, how to work out our own (time) salvation as His children. Fulfil ye my joy, that ye be like-minded, having the same love, being of one mind. Let nothing be done through strife or vain glory ; but in lowliness of mind let each esteem the other better than themselves. Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus. Do all things without murmurings and disputings; that ye may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world. O that we all on our dying day might have our lamps trimmed and burning, everyone shining as lights in the world!

As has been truly said, the Old Baptist who early seeks to know God's will and to walk in the old paths, who is found much and often among the spiritual, who is present at the regular meetings of the church, who holds up the hands of the feeble minister, who saves himself from this untoward generation, who glorifies God in keeping the sweet precepts ,of the gospel, is working out his own salvation. O that God would turn us from the vain and foolish things and make us faithful and zealous for the good and welfare of our beloved Zion! For if there ever has been a time when God's church and people ought to stand together and pull together in appreciation and thankfulness to Him, this surely is one such time.

Jesus said in His sermon on the mount that we are the salt of the earth. He also said if the salt had lost its savor, or preserving qualities, it was then good for nothing but to be cast out and trodden under foot of men. And I have sometimes feared that with all of our shortcomings, and even wars and fightings among us in some parts He would most surely cast some of us out, as He did our prototype, ancient Israel. But still He has manifested His love and mercy, even throughout the awful world conflict, through which the wicked nations of the earth have just come. If you have not thought of it, here is something to think about. We believe and feel to know that the Primitive Baptist is the true church of God set up by the Saviour Himself while here on earth in person. She was driven by severe persecutions from the old world of Asia, Africa, and Europe. She is now located in the countries of England, Canada, the United States, Australia, and New Zealand. And now what do we see? The old countries terribly torn and blasted to destruction by fire and shell from the sea, earth, and sky, while the homelands of our beloved Zion, with the one exception of England, have scarcely been touched! Can we not see the kind providence and protection of our God in this? Then why not with renewed energy and zeal serve and praise Him for it all ?

May we all seek to know His will concerning us and then practice what we know. Many of the qualifications of a bishop, preacher or deacon will apply to all of us. We should all be blameless, of good behavior, given to hospitality, not greedy of filthy lucre, and as they must have a good report of them which are without, even that every Old Baptist is duty bound to have. And with all of these good traits and qualities yours, and though I be the least, most unworthy one among you, let me live with you, let me go, where you go, let me lodge where you lodge, let your people be my people, let your God be my God; where you die, I want to die, and there I would that you bury me in our beloved church yard. I would not that any should put flowers on my casket. If any can have any little "flower" for me, I much prefer them while I live, and can get some little encouragement and joy from them. I would have nothing except the true doctrine of God our Savior preached over my dead body, nor anything sung except the gospel truth of our good old songs. The same gospel singing that I have loved for these many years, and by our beloved preachers and singers, the Primitive Baptists, any and all who may be present on that occasion, and their friends. Then after you have laid me away in the grave to await the great resurrection morning, I would have you continue on in peace always among yourselves and with our God, never forsaking the assembling of yourselves together oft in His service, both in our beloved Little Branch, and visiting often among the sister churches of our beloved Mt. Zion, and sister associations, just as this poor old unworthy has practiced and enjoyed for all of the years, since the Lord's poor first took me into their number, and manifested their sweet love for me by taking me into their fellowship, their hearts, and their good homes wherever I went all over this land of our freedom.

I have found the Master's saying so true. If I have left father, mother, brother, sister, wife, children, houses and lands for His service I always found them wherever I went, fathers and mothers in Israel, brethren, sisters, little children of God, and the very best of homes. My mistakes have been many, and I have sometimes been misunderstood and suffered hard knocks, but wish to hold no ill will, and may the Lord forgive them and me. Now I have rambled over a lot of space trying to tell you some things I see and believe and things I would that you observe and do before I die, and after I am gone the way of all the earth. I suppose that some few Old Baptists will be ready to say that I am trying to bring in new practices into the church, but I have already agreed to give up any wrong idea or notion of mine, as soon as you show me by the Bible that it is not in harmony with, and according to, the teaching of that Book. Let the objector be sure at least that he is not holding to an old unscriptural custom or tradition, instead of searching the Scriptures to know what they do really teach. We have seen a few so married to a custom, that they think you are denying the faith if you break it.	

As our name implies, I hope that we are truly a Little Branch of the true vine Jesus Christ (John 15) and that we (you) may continue to abide in Him, and to grow and flourish, producing good fruit, sixty and one hundred fold for many, many years after you have laid this poor old unworthy writer in the grave. Luke 8:8. And as I near the time that I must leave you it seems that my love for you grows stronger, and my heart's desire and prayer for your well-being grows more fervent. I have for many years dearly loved and tried to work for the general good of the dear old Mt. Zion association and for all of her several churches, and I love her as an associated body above all others, yet my beloved Little Branch home is dearest of all.

Whether I have lived a godly life with and before you, I leave you to judge. I have suffered some persecution, but cannot claim for myself, that it is because I have lived godly in Christ Jesus. But you that will live godly in Him shall suffer persecution. His great apostles said so in Second Timothy, third chapter. Read it and take consolation from it, and continue in the things you have learned to love and enjoy in the worship and service of God. Jesus said, "Blessed are ye," when men persecute you and say all manner of evil against you, falsely. Rejoice and be glad that it is not true that you are not guilty as charged. He tells you also to love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and to pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you; that you may (manifestly) be the children of your Father which is in Heaven. 0 Lord, how can we do this? Surely not without thy holy spirit which was in the man Christ Jesus when he said, "Father, forgive them. They know not what they do." Without Him we can do nothing. With His Spirit to guide us we can do all of His bidding. Then God grant that this spirit and this mind be in us which was also in Christ Jesus. Let brotherly love continue. Let all love and visit one another, and visit often among the sister churches. I love this practice. Let our little church and our whole Mt. Zion association be one happy family in union and love. I being least among you am not worthy to advise you, yet I greatly desire that you live on in spiritual health and prosperity.

Now I close my rambling, random message with a few words from the great apostles. "Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these before, beware lest ye also, being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own steadfastness." "Finally, brethren (and sisters) farewell. Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace; and the God of love and peace shall be with you. The Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all. Amen."

If I may select them, please sing Good Old Songs numbers 105, 125, 24, 634, 436, 21, and 231 (S. E. C. in last v.) over my dead body.
S. E. Copeland

PART TWO 

Dear Brother in the Lord,

I address you thus, not because I feel to be worthy of note, but because I feel sure that you are a child of the living God. No doubt you will be surprised to receive this letter from me, but for a long time I have felt impressed, or had a desire from some cause, to write you and cannot be content until I make the attempt. From my first acquaintance with you there has been a feeling of nearness or drawing toward you. Now, you might conclude that this is only because of the existing tie that binds me to your father's family in love and fellowship. There might or could be such a tendency, but I can hardly think that your being his son, and nothing more, would or could cause this feeling of nearness to you or love for you, but I hope that it is something more, and for better; that it is the second relationship of us all to our Heavenly Father, even because we are all born of God and heirs of heaven by His free grace, for by grace we are saved, and not of works lest any should boast.

Many, many times have I thought of our little talk at dear Brother Howard's last summer while he lay on his death bed, and especially of one particular assertion that you made, and that was, "If I had never prayed, I never would have been forgiven and saved." Now, as you know, Brother Grover calls you his blind brother, one that is in possession of a good experience of grace, but cannot see that it is all by the grace of God, and not in anywise or part by anything that you did or could do. So now, if the Lord will, I would just love to be an eye opener long enough to show you that if you had never been saved by the Lord, you never would have prayed to Him; that His imparting of spiritual life, saving you, is the moving cause of your prayers, and not your prayers the cause of the saving. If, as you said, you never could have been saved if you had not prayed, what did Jesus accomplish when He died for you? If you had failed, or if you had stubbornly refused to pray, would that have made His suffering and death of none effect a total failure in your case? The angel said plainly and positively that, "He shall save His people from their sins," and the Scripture also says that "He shall not fail nor be discouraged," but you say you never would have been saved if you had not prayed. If you are right, then He would have failed in your case, and don't you suppose that He would have been somewhat discouraged? Of course He would, if your doctrine is true.

Now, dear brother, I just wish that I could help you to see the truth as it is in Jesus, not merely to argue or to down your doctrine, which is easy to do, but because I have a love for you, and hate to see you taking light for darkness and darkness for light. Isa. 5:20. Just why did you need salvation, any way, and why do all men need it? Because you were dead in sin, lost, for all men are dead in sin, until they hear the voice of the Son of God and live. And that voice is not the written, nor the preached word, either, for dead men do not understand them, nor can they hear them. I have Jesus' own word for this. John 8:43. He was talking face to face with some men, who had not been born again, preaching His own gospel before them, but they were dead sinners and could not understand. He said "Why do ye not understand my speech? even because ye cannot hear my word." If then, men in nature cannot hear the written or preached word, cannot understand it, let's drop the idea that they must hear it and believe it before they can be saved. Are we going to require them to do something that Jesus himself said they could not do? Going to require them to do an impossible thing? I will ask again, why do men need salvation? And I will answer, because they are lost, dead in trespasses and sin; the whole human race having died in Adam when he sinned and fell, back yonder in the garden: "As in Adam all died," but you will not tell me that the whole race of man will be made alive in Christ. 

God made man in His own image and placed him in the garden and gave him a law, with the penalty of death if he violated it. "In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die."

But the serpent or devil came along and said, "Thou shalt not surely die." So man went ahead and violated the law of God, and he either died or did not die. Which shall we believe? "By one man sin entered into the world and death by sin; and so death passed upon all, men, for that all have sinned." Rom. 5:12. Both Jews and Gentiles are all under sin; there is none righteous, no not one. There are none that understand or seek after God; none that doeth good, not one; their mouths are full of cursing and bitterness, hence no room in there for a sweet prayer to God; destruction and misery are in their ways; and the way of peace they do not know; there is no fear of God before their eyes; God is not in all of their thoughts ; they care nothing for Him, they receive not the things of the Spirit of God, neither can they know them; they are foolishness to them. The natural man cannot please God. Read and study carefully Romans, 3rd, 5th,  and 8th  chapters, I Cor. second chapter and get this also, that David, a man after God's own heart said, "Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me."

Thus we see that even the very best of men were sinners from the very beginning of their existence, and thus we see it proved conclusively by the Holy Scriptures that all men in nature are totally depraved, alienated from God, not subject to His holy spiritual law, neither indeed can be. This fact and most important truth all Arminians seem to utterly ignore, and I have often wondered at this, for it does seem to me like you children of God among them ought to be able to see the truth of the matter. I know the dead alien sinner cannot see and believe the truth of the Bible, for it is a thing of the Spirit and we have already seen how he does not receive it and cannot know it. Neither does he want to know it. He is thoroughly satisfied with himself in the sphere in which he was born; his eyes stand out with fatness; within his own mind he is equal to every emergency. He is the strong man armed and his goods are in peace. He feels himself amply able to take care of the situation, so after awhile, after an indefinite time, at some future time when he gets good and ready, he will get religion and be saved. Poor, naked, without hope and without God in the world, dead in trespasses and sin and willingly so!

That is the answer to my question, "Why do men need salvation?" Don't forget to read and study the references given, and if I am wrong, "show me." Many more could be given, but this is positive proof, for "by the mouths of two or three witnesses" every word is established. So, now, if I could, I would show you the truth as to how men are saved from that awful state they are in by reason of sin. "There is a way which seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death." I think that "way" that seems right to men in nature's night and also to some blinded children of God, (you for one), is the Arminian way. By Arminian I mean any and all who reject the Bible doctrine of election and predestination. 

The Arminian way is the way of dead sinners and it seems right unto them, and the end thereof are the many ways or orders of men that God's blinded children are led into, and it means death to them in more ways than one, but not spiritual death. It is death to their usefulness in, and the joys of rest, peace and happiness that are for them in His one true church and kingdom here on earth. So then, the way that seems right to a man is not the way our eternal salvation comes. It is not by our prayers, for the sinner is dead and cannot pray. It is not by belief for the sinner is dead and cannot believe. It is not by hearing the gospel preached, for he is dead, and Jesus himself said that he cannot hear it. These are all righteous works and dead men cannot do them. And if they could they would not get eternal life by doing them for eternal salvation comes, "Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to His mercy He saved us by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which He shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Saviour." Titus 3:5-6. "Ye must be born again." "Except a man be born again he cannot see the kingdom of God."

Jesus in John 3:3, "For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves; it is the gift of God; not of works, lest any man should boast. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them."

That is just how it is done and how it is not done. As in the natural realm there is no child before generation, and no work required before birth, even so in the spiritual realm, there is no spiritual child before regeneration and no work required before he is born of God. Why, before the new birth he cannot even see God's spiritual kingdom or church, much less work in it or to get in it. And if it were for something that we do to get in, it could not be a gift from God, for it would be our wages for the work we did whether that be belief, prayer, or what not. But I hear you ask, "Don't we have to exercise faith?" NO. Read that text again and study it carefully. It is by grace through faith, but not our grace, nor our faith, as you should clearly see. Dead sinners have no faith to exercise, neither do men do good works spiritually until they are created in Christ unto them. They must first hear the life-giving voice of the Son of God and live. And don't forget, that voice is not the written nor the preached word. They are not His voice. Nor is it the preacher's voice they must hear. It is that small still voice speaking life, spiritual life, into the heart and soul of the dead sinner; a direct operation of God's Holy Spirit on the dead sinner, creating him a new creature. "If any man be in Christ he is a new creature." II Cor. 5:17. That, dear brother, is just what happened or was done for you to cause you to pray to God, and not your prayers the cause of your having spiritual life. God gave you the life which enabled you to see yourself a sinner in His sight, and to feel your need of prayer, and the will to try to do His bidding.

Before this spiritual life began with you, you had none of these, and being not subject to God's spiritual law, you were not commanded to obey it. Not once in all the Bible is a dead sinner commanded to do anything in order that he might have spiritual life and be saved. A preacher of a certain order once told me that there are many such Scriptures. I promptly challenged him to show me just one—one verse—in the whole Book, and I would join his "church." That was several years ago and he has failed thus far to show me the verse, or even attempt it. I guess that he either does not want me in his "church" or he just could not find the verse. That is another mistake that all Arminians make. They forget or simply ignore the fact that all Scripture is given to the man of God to His children and they misapply it, hand it out broadcast to aliens the same as to the children, or even more to aliens, trying to persuade them that are not children to be children. To be just as plain as Jesus, that is taking the children's bread and casting it to dogs, and casting pearls before swine. He said it is not meet to do that way; that is, it is not right and proper to do it.

Here you might think to remind me that Jesus told one young man what to do to inherit eternal life, but I will call your attention to the fact that He did not do that, but He did tell His disciples that with man such a thing is impossible. To inherit means to take by descent from an ancestor; to receive from a progenitor as a part of one's nature. Then the only possible way for one to inherit eternal life, the God life, is to receive it from God as his progenitor or father. If we receive it for anything we do it would be a reward for services rendered and not an inheritance. I don't think that man (see Mark, tenth chapter and study it closely) was a dead sinner, but a blind child of God like Grover's brother, and he was an Arminian believing that his eternal salvation had to be by or for his own good works, and he had been very zealous in doing them for when Jesus enumerated the ten commandments to him he said "all of these I have kept from my youth up." But Jesus told him that he still lacked something. How could that be if eternal life is obtained by keeping the law, the commandments, and he had kept them all from his youth up? It could not be, but by the deeds of the law shall no flesh be justified in God's sight. "If thou wilt be perfect, sell that thou hast and give to the poor," etc. Matt. 19:21, and Mark 10:21. If you will be perfect in obedience to God's commandments. Yes, I think he was an Arminian and he came to Jesus and addressed him as a man, just as many address the preacher today, wanting to know, "What good thing must I do to be saved in eternal Heaven?" "Why callest thou me good? There is none good but God." Why did He answer him that way? I think it was because he addressed Him as a man, only, and not as Lord or Saviour. "Go sell that thou hast." Go get rid of your possessions, the things that you have been trusting in for salvation. Throw away all of your supply of badges and emblems of the worldly orders of every kind and give your life, yourself, to the poor in spirit, God's people and your treasure shall be in heaven, the one true church, or kingdom of God, here on earth which is their's. 

When you see these things in their true light I believe you will follow Him and rest from your labors—the things that you have been doing and trusting in for salvation. You will lose confidence in the flesh, works of your own, and trust alone in the merits of your Saviour, Jesus Christ for your eternal salvation. But there is a salvation for you as God's child, to work out here in time, but that has nothing whatever to do with your eternal destiny. That is the work of God alone and what you may do, or leave undone, does not change it.

If I can just get you to see that there is more than one salvation taught in the Bible, I will have taught you a most important lesson—a lesson that every one must learn before he can see the perfect harmony of the whole Bible. Without this it is a big bundle of contradictions and no man on earth could harmonize it to save his life. Try it on just this one: Eph. 2:8-9 tells us that it is not of works, also Titus 3:5, I believe, while Philippians 2:12 by the same apostle tells us to work it out. So there you are now with a great clash in the Bible, if there is only one salvation taught. This is another great truth that is utterly ignored by so many people, even many of God's children. Also many, yes, most people fail to notice that every Scripture is addressed to some particular person or people, just like you would address a letter to your wife, or to your own family and not to the world in general. 

For example: here lies my Bible open before me at the beginning of Paul's letter to the Philippians. The first verse tells who is writing and what they are; to whom they are writing and what they are. "Paul and Timotheus, the servants of Jesus Christ, to all the saints in Christ Jesus which are at Philippi with the bishops and deacons." To all the saints at Philippi, but not to any dead sinners at that place. All Scripture is given to the children of God and not to dead aliens. It is given that the man of God may be perfect (in obedience), thoroughly furnished unto every good work, (II Tim. 3:16), and he should study to show himself approved unto God, rightly dividing the word of truth. That is, rightly applying the word of truth. II Tim. 2:15. The terms "whole world," "all men" or "all people" do not always (and seldom does) mean the whole race of Adam.  John's first letter, 2:2 having reference to Jesus our Saviour says, "And he is the propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world." 

Propitiation means satisfaction. So then if Jesus made satisfaction for the sins of every man of Adam's race, is not, or will not every one be free from sin and all saved in heaven eternally? If He made the offering to His Father and satisfied for all men, what could send any man to eternal hell? But the same writer in the same letter said before he closed that, "We know that we are of God, and the whole world lieth in wickedness." (5:19). Now there you are with two "whole worlds." Do they both include the whole race of mankind? If so, Jesus has taken away the sin of the whole race, and still the whole race is lying in sin. What does that look like? It would seem to me like He has put away sin by leaving it right where it was, or is, and the "we" in the last reference given must be a people, or something, not of Adam's race at all. Is that logical? No, but this is: The first "whole world" is the regenerate world, all that the Father gave to the Son in the covenant of redemption, all of the elect according to God's foreknowledge and predestination, and the last "whole world" is that part of Adam's race who were left in their sins, where they are by their own choice and where they are satisfied or content to remain as we have already seen. They do not want to come out. They can not want to come. Their will is depraved, became so in the sinning and fall of the first pair in the garden, and they are not included in any "whosoever will."

"Let whosoever will come and take the water of life freely." Dead men have no wills. They know not any thing. Eccl. 9:5. Those destitute of natural life have no will concerning the things of this earthly life. Even so those dead in sin or spiritually dead have no will concerning the things of God or spiritual life. So before one can have either will, he must first be given the life that such will springs from. If God has given one spiritual life, then the Spirit of God and the church or bride bids him come. "And let him that is athirst come." If he thirsts for spiritual things, it is because he has spiritual life, the life that demands such things, and remember always that "whosoever will" is commanded or invited not to take life freely, but the water of life. Because he has the life that demands the water, and not the water in order to get the life. (Rev. 22:17.) He that hath an ear, (not dead sinners) let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches." Not what He saith to dead sinners. Not talking to them, but to those who have spiritual life and ears. "Behold, I stand at the door and knock. If any man hear my voice," etc. What voice? Not the preacher's nor other audible voice, but that small still voice, the promptings of God's Spirit in the heart and soul of His regenerated and born and hearing children. 

"Ye must be born again." No child ever heard the voice of his parents before being born of them. Even so no human being hears God's voice before being born of God. If the dead sinner's heart were the "door" at which Jesus is knocking, and it depends on the dead arising of his own accord and opening the door, how long do you suppose it will take Jesus to get in? Don't forget that we have already seen how the dead man cannot hear His words. And if he cannot hear His words, how shall he hear His knock at the door? That language of Jesus was addressed to the church of the Laodiceans, His children, and not to aliens. The alien sinner can not choose to love God. Not one command to him to do so.

You may ask "Why, does not the Bible say "choose you this day whom you will serve, whether God or the devil?" No, it certainly does not. God has never given any one, saint or sinner, the right to choose between Him and the devil. Joshua said to the children of Israel, "If it seem evil to you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom ye will serve, whether the gods (idols) of your fathers before the flood or the gods (idols) of the Amorites in whose land ye dwell." If they were not going to serve God it made no difference which idol they served. One was as good as the other, and neither could save or benefit them. And it is the same in this day and age of the world. Many of God's children now worship idols as they did then. Are we not doing so when we look to or trust anything that we or any man can do for our eternal salvation? Anything except the merits of Jesus alone? Cursed be the man that makes flesh his arm or trusts in man. Jer. 17:5.

Now I hear you ask, "Are sinners not free agents?" No ! I have not found anything like that in the Bible. If it is in there you may look for it in the verse following the one that tells you there is such a thing as red hot ice. Dead men free to choose God and be saved, or the devil and be lost? If they are that free, what is their state or condition before they choose either God or the devil? And what if one chooses to choose neither God nor the devil, then what? The truth is they are unable to choose—already dead, lost; and will forever remain so if God does not find them, as He found Jacob of old in a waste howling wilderness. Read Joshua 24:15, or the whole chapter and see how they miss the truth when they apply that command to dead sinners.

Yes, when I hear preachers cry "Free agency" or "Free agent" I think "Red hot ice" or imagine a vender going through the crowds yelling "Ice cold hot peanuts!" I see by our standard authority for the definition of words that "agent" has more than one meaning. First, "an actor: one who exerts power, or has the power to act." But the sinner being dead has no power to act, hence he is not an actor, neither is he free, because he is bound by death in sin. Second, an agent is a "deputy or a substitute, one entrusted with the business of another." And I dare say you never saw one of them who was free to do as he might please to do with his employer's goods or money. Let one deal dishonestly with them and see if the sheriff is not soon on his trail. So, there is no such "animal" as a free agent, not even in the Garden of Eden. Adam was not free to do as he pleased, but he was under a law and his violation of that law is what placed us all where we are today. When he fell, his whole posterity fell with him. The fountain head became corrupt, hence the whole stream of humanity became corrupt. Yet I believe that every infant that dies in infancy is safely housed in heaven, saved, regenerated and born again just like God's adult children are saved. If they were not sinners, they would not die, for sin is the cause of all deaths. I have two sweet babies already gone over into eternal bliss with their dear Saviour who took little children in His arms and blessed them—because they were sinners and needed the blessing.

Now don't misunderstand me. I did not say that Adam had to do as he did and make everybody sinners. I believe he could have kept the law—but he didn't. We are not considering what might have been, but what is. 

Everyone is born in sin. Our parents and foreparents were sinners and we could not be born of them into a realm above that they occupied. Neither do we think of blaming them for our being here, for all created things are satisfied to be and remain in the realm in which they were created, or born, human beings not excepted. And I have already tried to show you when and how any of them will ever get out of this lower, natural realm into the higher, spiritual realm. God has chosen some of Adam's fallen race to occupy the spiritual realm with Him, chose them a long time ago (Eph. 1:4) and all that He chose in, and gave to, the Son shall come to Him, all that the Father draws to Him, and those only. John 6:37 and 44, or better still, read the whole chapter. 

Now you might ask why He did not choose all instead of some of the race. If you will tell me why He loved Jacob and hated Esau before they were born, neither of them having done any good nor evil, then I will do my best to answer. 

But before you try to answer me, read Romans nine and give me a Bible answer. You wanted to know if we, the Primitive Baptists, do not believe in good works. Most certainly we do—after one has been created in Christ Jesus unto them. But remember Jesus said a corrupt tree cannot bear good fruits, good works. First "make the tree good." For we are His workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them. Eph. 2:10.

Dead, alien sinners are not "unto" good works for they have not been created in Christ Jesus unto them. They are still "corrupt trees" and cannot bear good fruit. But after they shall have been born again, made new creatures in Christ, they will then be good "trees" and they can and should produce good fruit and much fruit. All such are now God's children and every command and exhortation to good works is to them. They should serve God, because He is their righteous Heavenly Father, and not in order to become His children. Blessed are they, regenerated, born again, and yet they often feel to be sinners (and are), even the chief of sinners as Paul expressed it, (I Tim. 1:15) the very people Jesus came to save. They are the poor in spirit. They see and feel their poverty and nothingness in the sight of God, but Jesus says they are blessed characters. They are they that mourn and He says they shall be comforted. They do not mourn voluntarily in order to be God's children, but since God has given them eternal life, causing His Holy Spirit to shine in their hearts, they see their inbred corruptness of nature by reason of sin, and they mourn on that account. 

Dead sinners cannot see their own corruptness and don't mourn on account of it. "Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness." When you see one hungering and thirsting after God and the things pertaining to His church and kingdom you may be assured there is a born again child of God, and not a dead sinner trying to become a child of God, for we have already seen the proof that none such seek after Him.

Now, dear friend, (and brother in Christ, I believe,) I do hope that you can see some of these truths; and seek for more, thus saving yourself, not in eternal heaven, but from the way that seemeth right to men—but is not right. The untouched field seems broader now than the one I have tried to work out, but look at this letter, so long! May God bless you as He has your father's family.
S. E. Copeland
Guntersville, Ala.
PART THREE

FROM LITTLE BOY TO PREACHER

Elder James F. Dew,

Dear Elder, I have been reading your page , “Baptist Boys and Girls,” in the Landmark Baptist Flag, and your talk to the children in that paper for February 3, especially attracted my attention, and I have read it over again several times.

Now I am a larger and older boy than I used to be, but from a very small boy I have had a few serious thoughts on religious things, and desired to learn all I could and be right—to know the truth.  Therefore, I will enclose a stamp for reply, and ask you to explain some things a little more fully for my information and satisfaction.  You say that as a result of Adam’s sin all boys are born with a sinful nature, but they are safe under the shed blood of Jesus until they reach the years of accountability; and then and there they pass from under His blood and die spiritually.

Now, please tell me just when do we reach the age of accountability, and how we may know when we get there?  You say we are born with sinful natures.  Please explain the difference between our sinful nature now and our sinful nature after we shall have reached the age of accountability and passed from under Jesus’ blood and died spiritually.  I am so anxious to know!  You say sin came into the world by Adam.  Rom. 5:12.  I turned and read it and find that it also says, “and death by sin.”  

Now if sin is the cause of death after we reach the age of accountability, what causes sweet little babies and small children to die before they reach that age, and while they are safe under Jesus’ blood?  If I know my heart, I want to know the truth.   You say that because of Adam’s sin all people everywhere are lost.  I suppose you mean all except the little ones that have not reached the age of accountability?  But please explain how these have sinful  natures and yet are not sinners.

There are other things I need more information about, but fear I might tax your patience with too long a letter.  So, hoping to have a reply by early mail, I close for the time.
S. E. Copeland

REPLY TO FIRST LETTER 

Mr. S. E. Copeland,

My Dear Brother: Your interesting letter of the 27th inst. reached me today, and I hasten to answer, as per your request. Now for your questions.

1. The years of accountability vary with different people. With some children it is as early as four or five, and with others probably ten or twelve. As soon as the person knows right from wrong; that he should not do a thing, and that thing is sin to do so. I was in a meeting in Iowa some years ago and Brother J. M. Wilson's little daughter, Dorothy, who was then only four, cried with a broken heart and wanted to repent of her sins, accept Jesus and come forward and make a public profession, and was restrained by her parents, they thinking that she did not realize what she was doing. At night after returning home she again told them she knew what she was doing, and wept over her sins, though she was a model child. She was conscious of her sinfulness.

2. When we know that we have sinned; that we have done wrong; that we have acted as we should not have, that is proof sufficient that we have passed from under the blood, and need to repent and believe in the Lord Jesus. (Mark 1:15, Luke 13:3, John 5:24, Romans 10, and Acts 16:29, 30.)

3. The difference between the sinful nature we receive from Adam, and the sinful nature after we have passed from under the blood of Jesus, is the difference between a passive and an active condition. The child that has the sin of Adam (and we all have it) did not actively sin, but was inactive and passive, and in a certain sense inherited that sin. The child's sin inherited from Adam could be illustrated by the poison nature of the small snake before it grew any fangs, or poison bag. It is not active, yet within the very being of that little snake are the germs of poison, and so are the germs of sin within our very nature, that will break forth when we become old enough to know and choose good or evil. The child did not sin to cause it to have the nature that it had at birth, but the nature is inherited from Adam. The child soon after being able to do anything does sin, and thus wilfully and deliberately does wrong, and sins of its own accord. Thus it is active in its own sins.

4. The death spoken of in Rom. 5:12 is not merely physical death, or the separating of the soul and body, but it is spiritual death, or separating of the soul from God. Little children do die spiritually as soon as they reach the years of accountability. Of course physical death also is the result of Adam's sin, too, but Jesus did not make atonement to deliver people from physical death, but from spiritual death. Be careful to note just what the words mean in the Bible. In Genesis, where the serpent and Eve are talking, she says the Lord said they would die if they partook of the forbidden tree, and they did die spiritually at that very moment, and doubtless the germs of physical death set in, but they died spiritually the very minute they willed to disobey God and partake of that fruit, though it was years after before physical death; and Russellites and others try to make God a liar because they did not die physically then. 

5. As said above, the sinful nature that the children have before they reach the years of accountability is inherited from Adam, (Psalm 51:5, Jer. 13:23, Job 14:4, and Genesis 3rd; chapter John 3:16, Eph. 2:3, II Cor. 11:3, Rev. 22:2; also read Luke 13:5, Mark 1:15, Acts 20:21, John 3:16, and 5:24.)

I am glad to have had this letter from you. If anything is not clear I shall be very glad to write you again. Feel free to call on me for anything I can do. All good wishes.	

Truly and sincerely,
James F. Dew


LITTLE BOY'S SECOND LETTER 

Elder James F. Dew,

Dear Sir, Your kind letter of the 3rd inst, came to me while I was sick in bed and it was read with interest.  Thank you for prompt answer, and also for assuring me that I may feel free to call on you again if anything is not clear to me. I looked up and read every scripture that you referred me to as proof texts, but cannot yet understand how the small children have sinful natures, and yet are not sinners, but are safe under Jesus' blood until they arrive at the age of accountability, then die spiritually. Please do tell me where to find the Scripture proof of this, as I find on reading your letter again that you referred me to many as proof of your answers to my other questions, but none for this one. I don't know much about the Bible, but sometimes enjoy reading it, and I want to know more about it. For, as stated in my first letter, I am an older and larger boy than I once was, and suppose that I have arrived at the age of accountability, for I often feel to be a sinner, and that I have done wrong.

If passing from under the blood of Jesus makes one feel that way, and causes him to die spiritually, then I must have reached that awful state some time in the past. But I desire to know the truth and to be saved, and now if I am in the number and condition of those described in Rom. 3:9-18, please tell me how to get out and be saved from it. I read where a man asked Jesus (Mark 10:17) what he must do to inherit eternal life, but Jesus did not tell him anything he might do to inherit eternal life. Then I read (John 3:3) where He told Nicodemus that "except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God." And I suppose that by "man" He means also boys and girls that have arrived at or crossed over the line of accountability. So, then, please tell me, what we must do to be born again. If we are all spiritually dead, and all in the condition that Paul describes in Romans 3, how are we to repent of our sins, and believe in Jesus, there being no fear of God before our eyes? I don't want to intrude on your patience and valuable time too much, but if you will explain these things to me fully in harmony with your teaching concerning the line of accountability you will have done me a great favor. May I still feel assured that, instead of it being any burden on you, it is a pleasure to teach me, since your calling and work is to tell the children how to be saved?

Hoping to hear from you again soon, I enclose a stamped envelope for reply.	
Your friend,
S. E. Copeland

SECOND REPLY

Mr. S. E. Copeland, 

My Dear Sir, Your letter of the 21st to hand and read with interest. I lay aside everything else to answer immediately, since you say "I suppose that I have arrived at the years of accountability, for I have felt many times that I have done wrong." My friend, I am satisfied that you have reached the age of accountability, and furthermore that if you die as you are now, without God you are lost, and your soul will go out into an eternal hell where there is no hope, but where the lost will be punished forever.

1. Let me say first that the question you ask about God's plan for infants under the blood is a question that the lost man need not and should not discuss and study until first he is saved. I will answer your question later on in this letter, but let me talk with you about your soul now, and you talk with God about it now. The enclosed leaflet "Where are you going to spend eternity?" shows you, step by step, what is necessary to be saved. Of course salvation is from God a free gift, and yet you must seek that salvation.

2. You are in the class in Romans third chapter. Paul showed in the first chapter that the heathen are lost because of their practice, and that the Jews are lost because of their violation of the law, and that the law (3:19) was given for the specific purpose of showing the Jews were sinners and shutting their mouths and making them acknowledge they were sinners and lost. You have admitted that you were a sinner, and if you are a sinner, friend, you are unrighteous in God's sight and lost (Matt. 13:49, 50), and your soul will be cast into the "furnace of fire," which is hell. It is awful to think about, but it is true. If you know you are a sinner (and you are) the first thing for you to do is to repent, look with sorrow to God. Confess your sins asking Him to forgive-them, and believing, trusting, accepting Jesus Christ as your personal Saviour. (Mark 1:15, Luke 13:3, II Cor. 8:10, John 5:24, 3:16-18, 6:37, Romans 10:9-13, John 1:12, Titus 2:14.) Now from these Scriptures you will find that you (a)  must be sorry for your sins toward God, forsaking them by the help of God: (b) must believe, accept, come to, trust Jesus as your personal Saviour, because He became your substitute, bearing your sins in His own body and suffering all you would have suffered if you had gone to hell and stayed there forever. (c) You must call upon God in the name of Jesus. In other words pray. Get your father or mother or some Christian friend to pray with you, and then pray yourself, or else get out alone and pray to God. Of course, you can pray silently, but it is better to pray out loud. You must pray for yourself. (d) Keep on praying. The Lord said you must have sorrow. Do you have it? He said you must hear and believe. Do you believe in Christ and the best you can, accept Him as your Saviour? He said "him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out." Then if He receives you when you come the best you know; if you will do your part the best you know, can you not trust Him to do His part? Trust Him regardless of any feeling. Of course you ought to feel happy, but do not trust a feeling or look for a feeling instead of a Saviour.

Now will you get on your knees and pray? Get right with God before you read any more of this letter. Let the remainder alone until you are saved by grace through faith. (Eph. 2:8.) Pray now. If you are not saved now, keep on and on and on until God does save you. He wants to save you.

I will try and finish this letter in a few days, writing you fully about the question you are interested in. But let me caution you not to worry about the others now, but first get right with God, and then after you are saved study these questions and problems. Write me any time. I am glad to hear from you.	

Sincerely and truly,
James F. Dew

LITTLE BOY'S THIRD LETTER 

Elder James F. Dew,

Dear Sir and Friend, After long waiting I am writing you again. In your letter of March 24, you answered in a brief way some of my questions, and said in closing that you would try and finish that letter in a few days and write me fully about the question I was most interested in. And now I have waited and watched every mail for some time expecting to receive a taller answer, but have been disappointed. I have known for some time that I am a great sinner, yet my greatest desire and my little hope is that I may by the grace of God be permitted to be with Him and His redeemed in the eternal Heaven of heavens.

And I am still much interested in all of the questions asked in my other letters to you. You say you are satisfied that I have reached the age of accountability; that I am in the class referred to in Romans 3; and that if I die as I am now my soul will go out into an eternal hell. You say the first thing for me to do is repent, look with sorrow to God. How can I, since in that class (Rom. 3) there is none that seeketh after God; there is no fear of God before their eyes; they already have all that their depraved hearts can wish, etc. Next you say I must believe. Well, now, I would rather be a true believer than anything I can think of, so please tell me how to believe in Him. Do please! tell me how to believe and how to have godly sorrow voluntarily. You say I must pray, but verse 14 says the mouth of all of this class is full of cursing and bitterness. So if I am one of them, how can I pray? And you say it is better to pray out loud than silently. Why so, if God already knows the very secrets and intents of my heart? And if my mouth is full of cursing and bitterness, there is no room in there for prayer anyway. I suppose this class is the same as the one in 1st Cor. 2:14, where it says the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, neither can he know them. And I suppose that real true prayer is a thing of the Spirit, so how am I to know a prayer if I hear it, or should say it myself ? If I can not receive nor know the things of the Spirit, and cannot please God, what on earth can I do to be saved? My heart's desire is to be right, and above all, to be saved, and you say God wants to save me, then what or who can hinder Him? His book says He does His will, that whatsoever His soul desireth even that He doeth. You say Jesus became my substitute, bearing my sins in His own body and suffering all that I would have suffered if I had spent eternity in hell. Oh, what a Friend He must be to a vile sinner like me! 

But still you say if I don't repent, believe, pray, etc., I will go to hell. Let me ask, what for? Is not God just? Would He still hold the debt against me after His beloved Son, in whom He was well pleased, had paid it in full, suffering as you say all of the agonies of eternal hell in my room and stead?

I know that I am ignorant. Don't know much, but want to know more. So please make it all as plain to me as you can. I cannot be content until you answer my questions about the infants, and also tell me why some reach the years of accountability at an earlier age than others. But I hope to hear from you again soon. Would not worry you with so many letters, but you keep on assuring me that you are glad to have them, and glad to help me all you can. So I will add these to be answered in your next letter: Are those in the class you referred to dead in sin? Am I dead to the things of God? I keep thinking about what Jesus said to Nicodemus:"Ye must be born again." Please tell me how to be born again. Find stamp for reply. 

Yours as before. 
S. E. Copeland

THIRD REPLY

Dear Neighbor, Rush of work has partly prevented me from writing you more at length. Your letter read with interest, and I must confess that I think you are more interested in a debate than you are in the salvation of your soul. If you spend your time trying to reconcile and harmonize "free agency" and "divine sovereignty" you are certain for hell. Logic is mighty tricky sometimes. To illustrate, look at this syllogism: June apples are red. This apple is red, therefore it is a June apple, and it might be any one of a number of red apples.

If you will spend as much time praying God to forgive and save you as you do on looking for hard and difficult questions, you will find Jesus Christ regardless of logic. My advice to you is to pray. Pray God to forgive you your sins.

Very truly,
James F. Dew
REMARKS

I began the foregoing correspondence intending to just gradually lead the preacher along and see how far he would go teaching his man-made Babylonish doctrine to children and call it gospel teaching. But it seems like he got an overdose of his own doctrine or his tower (Babel) fell on him or he got stuck up in his muddy, slimy mortar or confusion, so that he did not know his own language, and you can see how short he stopped and left me disappointed with so little of the "information" I had hoped to gain.

I wanted to know before he quit whether the babies had eternal life before they crossed the line of accountability and died spiritually, or while they were "safe" under Jesus' blood. It seems that he would have us believe that they are live sinners before they cross the line and there is nothing required of them to do, but as soon as they cross the line and die, they must go to work with a vim. Not required to do any work, while they live but plenty of it required of them after they die. Now how will that do for a "delicious" morsel of wonderfully confusing, unpalatable impossible-to-digest hunk of the doctrines and inventions of poor benighted sky pilots who (it is hard for me to believe otherwise) are out for the money and not for the soul nor truth. Poor little Dorothy, broken-hearted, weeping and mourning, wanted to repent and accept Jesus, but her parents hindered her. I wonder if they kept her from being saved! Guess the parson forgot that Jesus said, "Blessed (already) are they that mourn." Notice, too, how he says we may know that we have crossed over the line and passed from under the blood and died spiritually, with some of his proof-texts, especially John 5:24, which reads: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that heareth my word, and believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life and shall not come into condemnation; but is passed from death into life." 

Something crooked or snakey here. Jesus says somebody has just passed from death into life, but the preacher says they have just crossed  the line of accountability out of life into spiritual death!

We read about a crooked something away back yonder in the garden crossing God's doctrine in his talk with Grandma Eve. Poor preacher! I am thinking just a little bit about getting sorry for him. Another of his proofs, Acts 16:29. I guess the jailer has crossed the line, or maybe some of the children of the family had crossed, and in this case the old daddy had to do the believing in order to save them. And how nice it would have been if all of the little snakes had been good and never crawled about and struck at things so they could develop dangerous fangs and poison bags. So many people would have been saved from suffering and death.

Note also that he, under pressure for an answer on the infant question says the lost man should not discuss it; that I must first get myself saved; that salvation is from God a free gift, yet I must do something to get it. Even so I can get free goods from any merchant in town by paying for them, and free grace at the bank, if I pay for it: In his leaflet "Where are you going to spend eternity?" he quotes 2nd Peter 3:9 this way: "The Lord is not slack concerning His promise as some count slackness; but is longsuffering to you-ward, not wishing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance." All of whom? His leaflet is addressed to lost souls who have crossed the line and died spiritually. But Peter was writing "to them that have obtained like precious faith with us through the righteousness of God our Saviour Jesus Christ" and not to somebody that had crossed over an imaginary line and died and had no faith. 

But Preacher Dew says it is we that have crossed the line and died, and so we are dead now, yet we must get busy and do our part so God can do His part—save us by grace. He says God wants to save us and will do it, if we will let Him. He sent His Son to die for us, and He suffered for us all that we would have suffered, if we had spent eternity in hell, the just for the unjust, a perfect offering, but all to no avail unless we who are dead let Him save us. This is the monstrous doctrine of a man who puts himself out to teach children (and grownups, too) the way of life and salvation. No wonder he got sick and fell overboard or off his slimy tower, into his mud hole of confusion.

On the back of his typewritten letter is an advertisement of a revival meeting with two pictures. One is "Death" holding a long scythe and riding a pale horse as fast as he can run. The other is the devil pictured as the most hideous monster grinning and holding his claw-like hands as if to seize you and drag you down through the sulphurous clouds about his horned head into the lake of fire and brimstone.

Now, will a man preach the power that sends him? Are God's servants sent to preach a monster like that to scare children and dead sinners into His church? No! They are sent to preach Jesus and His power, and they preach Him. Then who is Dew? I cannot even think that he is God's preacher. His little puny god is not the Almighty God of the universe. Then Dew ought to put it this-way: "god wants to and will save you if you will let him."

Another thought in studying this Dew doctrine. The little child crosses that fatal line of accountability, whether he wants to or not. Not much "free agency" in that, but plenty of fatalism. For no matter how much, and how sincerely, the little fellow may want to stay on the safe side under Jesus' blood, he must pass on over the line out of safety into spiritual death! No way on earth to avoid it, except to die a physical death on this side of the line. So the little fellow is right in the middle of a bad fix— between two deaths, and he must die one or the other, whether he wants to or not. Wonderful "free agency!" 

And who is to blame for the spiritual death of the child, seeing he cannot help crossing the line? If God drew the line and then lets the child live, He thereby compels him to cross over into spiritual death ! Now you have God bringing the children right out from under the blood of Jesus and safety into spiritual death right when the devil wants them. And that makes God the greatest recruiting agent the devil has in the field, surely! 

But that is Parson Dew's, doctrine, and he is not the gentle dew, that distills sweetly on the Lord's tender plants. See Deut. 32:2. If I were a preacher, I would almost be ashamed of the fellow that invented, that "line." Instead of 1-i-n-e just leave out the "n" and the thing would be better described in plain truth. For it is nothing more than the invention of some man who is woefully ignorant, or cares not for the truth. Nothing of the kind taught in the Bible, and the Bible is a thorough furnisher to every good work, as well as doctrine. 

Will the parson tell us that God has changed ? Has He quit doing His will both in heaven and among the inhabitants of the earth? Can any man come to Jesus through regeneration who is not drawn by the Father? Will any fail to come who were given-to the Son? Will He draw at some and they refuse to come, thus thwarting Him in His purpose and desire to save them? Is God's power limited on either side of the preacher's imaginary line of accountability? If so, and God drew the line, did He not voluntarily limit His own power, thus giving Satan the advantage, or more power than Himself? Or if man or the devil drew it and there is no way around it. (but over or across it) who is most powerful? Read, Mal. 3:6, Dan. 4:35, John 6:24-27 and Matt. 1:21, and 28:18.

No, the line is not there, and the gospel truth of the matter is the devil invented that big yarn, and his servants (whether they be poor deceived children of God or not) are spinning it into a huge spider web all over this “enlightened” land.  God pity His little children who are so blind and thoughtless as to be caught in it. Why, oh why, don't they read some and think much for themselves? The way, the right way, the good old Bible way is so plain, so easy to find if you will, only look for it, instead of blindly following false teachers, taking their word instead of Bible word. "Stand ye in the ways, (false ways) and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls." Jer. 6:16.  More later—maybe.

S. E. Copeland

PART FOUR

W. A. Ethridge, 

Dear Sir, I have read, with some degree of interest your Questionnaire in your paper, "Apostolic Times" for January 1937, and will try my hand at answering them by number in the same order you ask them: 

1. How many arks did Noah build?
Ans. One.

2. Was not one sufficient for the purpose that God intended?
A. Sure, it was.

3. How many tabernacles did Moses erect? A. One.

4. Was not one sufficient to accommodate all the worshipers of Jehovah God?,
A. Yes.

5. How many churches did Jesus Christ Build ? A. One.	

6. Did he build two hundred or more?  A. No.

7. If the word of God without denominational influence or prejudice is preached to an honest man, and he 

decides to become a member of the only church found in the Bible, what church would he be a member of? A. If he were an obedient child of God he would follow the lead and example of his Saviour and be baptized by a Baptist, a Primitive or First Baptist preacher, into the one only true church, the Primitive Baptist church, commonly called Hardshell by most all modern religious orders, and their man-made preachers.

8. Will you answer the above question honestly?  A. Yes, that is the way I have answered it.

9. Can a child be born without being a member of the family at the same time.  A. Well, now it seems to me I have heard and read of some being born who were not exactly members of the family. One in particular I think of just now where somebody got uneasy for fear the birth might be delayed a little too long and it would be everlastingly too late. Read about it in Genesis 16. Haven't you seen examples of that sort of thing in these modern times where men and women are trying to help God along with His work? In that particular case the child born was not a member of the family. The man's wife said so, and she ought to know. Gen. 21:10. Haven't you seen and heard of men running a series of meetings for two to four weeks trying to get men (children) to be "born of water," thus not waiting till they were born of God, but running along ahead of Him "borning" Ishmaelites ? Also I feel sure you have known or heard of children being born out of wedlock. Are they "members of the family at the same time?" But that is all man's doing, not God's. His children are born into His family.

10. Does God have children who are not in His family?

A. All of God's children are members of His spiritual, invisible, triumphant family or church and no bastards are His. Wisdom which is above is the mother of them all. Gal. 4:26, to end of the chapter. But His children are not born into His church militant or organized family on earth. They are born first of the Invisible, born of God, (John 3) then it becomes their duty as obedient children, children of God, to follow Jesus into His militant kingdom or church, for thus it becomes them to fulfill all righteousness. Matt. 3:15. But not all of His spiritual or Spirit born children obey Him, hence some of His children are not in His church family in its militant form or organization.

11. Isn't that heretical and blasphemous? A. It would be if we charged God with having bastards, but I will not so charge Him.

12. Do you ever cast the shadow of doubt on God's word by saying "If the Bible be true?" A. No, not in the sense of doubting its being true, but if your doctrine is true, the Bible cannot be true, for it nowhere teaches water regeneration, or that water baptism is essential to eternal salvation. The Bible is true and I believe everything taught therein is as true as water baptism. Do you believe and teach it all?

13. Do you believe in teaching and practicing the things taught and practiced in the days of the apostles ? A. Yes, I do. Why don't you? I never hear one of your kind teaching some of the things taught in Romans, third, fifth and eighth chapters. Nor Matt. 1:21 without some "ifs" or "ands," etc. Nor John, third, sixth and eighth, nor Eph., first and second, just to mention a few that you diligently avoid tackling.

14. Is it right to teach for doctrine the commandments of men? A. No, you ought to quit it.

15. Was any preacher in apostolic times ever called "'Reverend" or "Doctor." A. No, not any of God's preachers, neither are the modern followers of a man who was excluded from the true church a little over a hundred years ago the first to call their preachers "Elder." One of your boys said we "learned" that from your people. I said "That is funny—the idea that we learned it from you when we had been using it for eighteen hundred years before you had been invented."

16. If a man can be saved out of the church, what is the church good for?  A. It is good for the purpose intended by its Builder, just as the ark was good for the purpose intended. Did the ark save Noah and his family in heaven eternal, or from timely destruction in the flood? And was "all men everywhere" commanded to go into the ark? No. Well, now here is a good place to teach something taught in the Bible, which you are careful to avoid—if you know what that is. Choice, election, etc. See?	

17. Is any man a Christian outside of the church that Christ established ? A. Not in the true sense of being an obedient, practical follower of Him in all of His precepts and examples. Many of God's children are not true Christians because they do not follow Christ all the way, yet everyone for whom Jesus died, everyone born of God, will be saved in eternal Heaven without the loss of one. Entering into the true church saves them (not dead sinners) from timely destruction of much peace, rest and happiness while they live here. It saves them from false ways and the little false gods of the world, even the little god of water baptism, as held onto so tenaciously by one or more worldly orders claiming Christ's name to take away their reproach. Isaiah 4:1. Does the disobedience of ones children destroy their relationship to their father?

18. Is any man a Free Mason outside of the Masonic Lodge?  A. Not being interested in Free Masonry I have not investigated. God's church is the only order I desire membership in. He says it is wrong to be yoked up with unbelievers and infidels. How do you like your company? See II Cor. 6:14 to end of chapter.

19. Do you believe that eternal life is given to alien sinners without conditions? A. Yes, can dead men perform conditions. Read about them in the Garden of Eden, and in Romans, third and fifth chapters and I Cor. 2:14.

20. If so, what is the need for preaching the gospel? 
A. Plenty of need. God's sheep get hungry and need feeding. They have life—eternal life—and can hear and know and eat and thrive on the gospel. It is food for lambs and sheep of God's fold. Dead alien sinners have no life demanding it, hence cannot receive nor know it, because they are not born of God, and their receiving your "gospel," which is not the gospel, proves this on them. Then you not being a sheep feeder, what are you? a goat feeder?

21. Will an infant that dies in infancy be held responsible for the sins of its father, grandfather or great-grandfather and suffer the torments of hell forever? A. No. No infant, dying in infancy ever goes to hell. Jesus took them in His arms and blessed them, and what He does is done forever. 

22. How is it possible that a human being made in the image of God can believe such a thing? A. I don't know. It is not possible for me to believe it any more than it is possible for me to believe that a creek or pool or river of water ever gave birth to a child of God.

23. Do you ask "When does one cease to be an infant?" When he or she becomes intelligent enough to be responsible. A. (But you didn't ask for one.)

24. Do you know that when a baby dies in its pure and pristine innocence it is saved and cannot be lost? A. I believe that all babies who die in infancy are saved, but not on or because of their "pure and pristine innocence," but because Jesus died for them and they are born again, just like older men and women. Why do you refuse to believe and teach what Jesus said to Nicodemus? Is not a baby a little man or woman? Do you know anything besides sin that brings death to human beings, big, little, old, or young? If so, you ought to have notified Paul before he wrote that letter to the church at Rome. And do you know of any other Saviour besides Jesus, the creek or water baptism not excepted?

25. Why? Because Jesus said, "Of such is the kingdom of heaven. Isn't that sufficient? A. No, not quite sufficient. Why didn't you tell all that Jesus said? How about the next verse? Why not teach it all? Have you forgotten your (unlucky) thirteenth question? "Turn back, 0 preacher in your flight, and try to be a child again just for tonight." Jesus said, "Verily I say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter therein." Yes, He said that in the next verse after He said "Of such is the kingdom of heaven." You say the little child receives it on his "pure and pristine innocence." Jesus says the way the baby or little child receives it is the way you must receive it, or you shall not enter therein. So, according to your own doctrine there is absolutely not a speck of chance under heaven for you to enter there for your "pure and pristine innocence" has long since vanished, and is now far out of your reach. And now I am wondering. Just how far back would you have to go to reach the state of "pure and pristine' innocence" again, if you have ever been there? I see by Webster that "pristine" means, of or belonging to a primitive or early state or period. David was a man of God's own heart and he lacked a lot of claiming pure and pristine innocence for himself at any time, even from the moment of conception. Here is what he said of himself: "Behold, I was shapen in iniquity; and in sin did my mother conceive me." So, unless you can go back to an earlier period than conception, and get into God's kingdom, that happy place you will never see, if your doctrine is true.

26. To whom is Christ the author of eternal salvation? Read Heb. 5:9. A. All that obey Him. How do little babies obey Him? Will you tell us now that he has said we big babies must be saved just in the same way that the little ones are saved? I am waiting to hear from you.

27. Isn't the Bible addressed to man's intelligence and understanding? A. To which class of men? If you mean the natural dead alien sinner, I answer, no, for it is of the Spirit of God, and that class of men cannot receive nor know it, as we have already seen. But if you mean the children of God, I answer yes, for all scripture is given for the benefit of that class. It is a perfect, thorough furnisher to the man of God, (II Tim. 3:16, 17) not dead aliens.

28. Would the Word of God be any more reliable if the Lord should speak it Himself today in your presence than if He should write it? A. His word is perfect whether spoken or written. 

29. Is not writing as reliable as speech? A. Same as No. 28.

30. According to the great commission that Christ gave to His disciples has any one a promise of salvation who believes, but is not baptized? A. "Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ is born of God." I John 5:1. "He that heareth my word and believeth on Him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation; but is passed from death unto life," John 5:24. Yes, here is the promise proven by two of the best witnesses that not only one, but all who believe are saved, water baptism or no water baptism. Is that sufficient? When Jesus died on the cross for the sins of His people did He accomplish anything? Did he atone for their sins, or will it take a good big pool of water to clean them up? He said in His dying hour that it is finished, but your theory denies this truth, saying it is not finished, and holding on to your idol, water baptism. Yes, many are saved eternally without baptism in water, yet God's children who fail or refuse to be baptized, not by you, but by the authority of His church and one of His legal administrators (Elders) miss a great deal here in time.

31. When you read the Bible, if you do, do you think it is some great miracle that no one can understand, except the elect ?  A. I have read it some, and I think it is some great miracle, too. Also I have observed that some understand its teachings while others seem to know nothing about them, ignoring completely all of its fundamental principles, and teach for doctrine the commandments and inventions of men. Why some will even deny the efficacy of the blood of Jesus applied to the sinner's heart, and the fact that he is born of God, and say that unless he is baptized in water, by a very modern variety of preacher, heaven he can never see. Can a dead man, or a child of the devil hear and understand God's word? Better read John 8:43 to 47 before you try to answer. Did you know that was in the Book? Anyway I will guarantee you have never taught it to your people.

32. Was the eunuch saved? A. Yes. Do you want the proof ? Here is some of it; He believed that Jesus is the Christ, hence was already born of God, and saved, all before Philip baptized him, and then when he followed his Saviour in baptism he went on his way rejoicing.

33. Was he saved by a direct, mysterious manifestation in a miraculous way? A. Sure, he was. When a man is born of God it is always a miracle performed.

34. Why did God send Philip the preacher to the eunuch, to preach the gospel? A. You say He sent him to preach the gospel. Right one time. But how long will you stay right? Not for long as we shall see. Did Phillip tell him he would have to be baptized in water to be saved? No. Phillip, like the first or primitive Baptist preacher, looked for some fruit, or evidence that the eunuch had already been saved, before agreeing to baptize him. Finding that he believed, and knowing that "He that believeth is born of God," therefore saved, he was ready to baptize him, and both were made happy.

35. Was Cornelius a good man? Yes. A. You answer yes, and so do I.

36. Was Cornelius a moral man? Yes. A. I think so, too.

37. Was Cornelius a praying man.? Yes. A. Right once again. 

38. Was Cornelius a devout man? Yes. A. You answer "Yes," but you don't believe your own answer. Can I prove that charge? Yes, by your own answer to your next question. I answer Yes, he was a devout man.

39. Was Cornelius a saved man? No. A. Now every devout man is a saved man, Cornelius included. But you say you do not believe that he was saved.

My Webster just referred to says "devout" means yielding a solemn and reverential devotion to God in religious exercises, particularly in prayer; pious, religious. Is that good fruit? "A corrupt tree cannot bring good fruit." Do you know who said that? A good tree bearing all good fruits, a man that feared, loved and worshiped God, and knew God, and not yet saved, all because he had not bowed the knee to your idol! Why, according to your doctrine (not Bible doctrine) all of the life work, suffering and death of our Saviour accomplished absolutely nothing, and your little water god is everything.

40. When was he saved? When he heard the gospel and obeyed it. A. That is your answer. Mine is, when he obeyed he came out and away from the -ites, and -isms, false doctrines and false ways of old worldly Babylon. He obeyed the Lord's command "Come out of her my people, that you be not partakers of her sins." Saved from them. Here is more proof that you are a part of Babylon, confusion: You say a man must do good works in order to be saved. Cornelius was a good man, a devout man, his works all good, yet you say he was not saved. Still bound for hell. Met yourself coming back, and didn't know yourself!

41. Do you know that any man who changes "shall be saved" from the place where Jesus put it (Mark 16:16) is a traitor to high heaven? A. He is at least an unsafe man to follow. The way Jesus put it cannot be improved upon, so I am well pleased with it that way. Can those that believe your "gospel" cast out devils? Can they speak with new tongues? Can they drink most any deadly thing and keep on going to your `'gospel" meetings? Can they lay hands on a man with smallpox and make him well?

42. Do you know that many people depend on rites and ceremonies, form, formalism and formality more than anything else? A. It seems so. Are you guilty?

43. Do you know, or not know, that the devil grins with satisfaction when people change God's word to suit their opinions ? A. I think he (Satan) is well pleased with a job like that, and I think he is equally as well pleased when men deny the work of Jesus in the salvation of His people, and try to make it all depend on immersion in water, or on any other god of their own imagination.

44. Do you believe that a church not found in the Bible is a Bible church? A. No, and the one founded or "restored" by one A. Campbell being about eighteen hundred years too young to be found in the Bible is not therefore, a Bible church.

45. How is such a thing possible? A. It is not possible, for several reasons. The one founded (on the sand) by Mr. Campbell has none of the doctrine and marks of identity of the one found in the Bible, has no line of succession back to it, as the true church has, (for God has never left Himself without witness) and would not know or recognize the true church if it met it in the big road.

46. If the form of baptism is a matter of choice with the convert, could not any other command of God be done according to the choice of the convert? A. There is only one form or mode of baptism with or in water and that is immersion just like John the First or Primitive Baptist preacher baptized Jesus. So if the "convert" chooses any other he chooses something that is not baptism.

47. Wouldn't that do away with the will of God entirely ? A. It would be ignoring the will and command of God, as most people do.

48. I know a Baptist preacher who took the word "will" out and had Jesus say "I build my church," (Matt. 16:18.) Is that being honest with God? A. No, it is not being honest with God to take out any word that He used. Yet it is easy to see where men have taken out not just one, but many words that He used. At least they don't seem to have any use for them, nor even know that they are in His Book. Yes, and I can see where a man "left out" or ignored many of them in publishing a list of questions or questionnaire in his paper.

49. Don't all Baptists have to do that in order to defend their doctrine? A. NO!! Not by any means whatsoever. No true Baptist of the first or Primitive type has to leave out one word. They are the only people I know who can use the entire Book, every word in it, and not have their doctrine exploded, so that you could hardly find any pieces left.

50. What will the answer be? A. You have it above, by a little, insignificant—call him what you will. Will you let your readers see it? If so, send me a copy containing same.

S. E. Copeland,
Guntersville, Ala.

He sent it back to me with this note: Dear Sir:
You were very nice (?) and courteous (?) in throwing "Campbellite" at me. I never saw a "Campbellite" in my life. Did you ever see one? Did it have a tail, cloven feet and hump on its back?

Respectfully,
W. A. Ethridge

Did I call him Campbellite? No. He must have felt guilty, though.
THE END

