







COMFORT of the
SCRIPTURES


A Collection of
One Dozen Editorials Recently Published In
The Advocate and Messenger
On The Comfort of The Scriptures
Together With An
APPENDIX
of
Interesting Articles
By R. H. PITTMAN,
Editor


Elder Harold Hunt
P O Box 5352
Maryville TN 37802

Dedication
_______

TO MRS. LUCY LAUCK BRUMBACK, the "Mountain Home" writer—that humble and unselfish, spiritually minded and talented, firm and faithful, loving and loyal Baptist, who though unable (because of deafness) to hear a sermon or a song for a quarter of a century, yet who never fails, unless providentially hindered, to attend every service at her church, is this little book

LOVINGLY DEDICATED
as a slight token of the
high esteem in which
she is held by
Her Pastor

January 24, 1925.		The Author 
Comfort of the Scriptures

(For whatsoever, things were written aforetime were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope. Rom. 15: 4.)

EDITORIAL No. 1

The Scriptures—The Old and The New Testaments

The primary meaning of the word scripture, is anything written. The Scribe was a writer. But in these articles we shall treat the meaning only as applied to the books of the Old and New Testament—usually referred to as The Holy Scriptures or the Holy Bible. The word scripture is not used in the Old Testament but one time, and then by Daniel in relating his experience in seeing a great vision, Dan. 10: 21. Daniel was one who had dreams and visions. And not only was he taught wonderful lessons by them, but he was also given wisdom to tell the dream of another and to correctly interpret it. As Daniel stood beside the river there appeared before him "a certain man clothed in linen, whose loins were girded with fine gold, * * * his face as the appearance of lightning, and his eyes as lamps of fire, and his arms and his feet like in color to polished brass, and the voice of his words like the voice of a multitude" and among other things said unto him, "I will show thee that which is noted in the scripture of truth." Daniel's God is our God—a God who changeth not—and He still sometimes comforts and instructs His children by dreams and visions. But while we find the word scripture only one time in the Old Testament, wefind it in its singular and plural form, fifty-two times in the New Testament. The Old Testament was written in Hebrew—the New Testament in Greek. There have been many versions or translations of the scriptures. Among all the Greek versions that which is called the Septuagint occupies the highest rank. This was a translation of the Old Testament into Greek, and according to tradition was performed by seventy-two Jews, each of whom, in a separate cell, made a complete translation of the entire Old Testament, and, when compared, these seventy-two copies were found to be so completely identical that they were, by the Jews generally, held to be inspired. 

There were several English versions before the Authorized Version in 1611, which was a translation from the Hebrew and Greek by order of James I, King of England. The translation was made by forty-seven scholars, each taking a portion, which was revised by the whole body, and because of its purity and great excellence, gradually superseded all preceding versions. This is the Bible we all use today, or should do so. 

There have been other translations since the Authorized Version, but none have found favor with sincere and unbiased scholars and honest seekers after truth. We believe the Bible is the word of God. In it God makes known to man His character and will. It was given by inspiration of the Holy Spirit, and although written by men, God directed them what to write and how to write, that as a rule of faith and guide to practice it might be perfect. A knowledge of the Bible and its application to us is more to be desired than fine gold. Therein are contained the words of eternal life, not eternal life, but the words testifying of eternal life in Jesus, and the types and shadows pointing to Him as "the way the truth, and the life." Someone has said, "The Scriptures contain, independent of a divine origin, more true sublimity, more exquisite beauty, purer morality, more important history, and finer strains both of poetry and eloquence, than could be collected within the same compass from all other books that were ever composed in any age or in any language." And I will in this connection give further facts relative to the King James, or Authorized Version. 

From history we learn that "King James the First, in 1604, on a motion in Hampton Court Conference made by Dr. John Reynolds, a Puritan, selected fifty-four scholars and divines, of whom forty-seven served in making a new translation." There were among them men of various denominations, and also "those who were of no church party. These men were all distinguished for their piety and eminent learning. They labored separately and together for three years. When they met together to examine the translation, "one of the party would read the translation, while the others held in their hands the scripture in the original language, and if any fault was noticed they spoke." Their aim was to put in English the exact meaning of the original language. 

History relates that these men received very little pay for their long and faithful service, but that it was a labor of love. Divine wisdom always selects proper instruments to do its required work; and we may therefore believe that the proof of the divine origin of the Scriptures and of their correct translation does not depend upon the character or fitness of the writers or translators, but upon God's purpose and dealings with the human family. 

There is a peculiar providence in the preparation and the care of the Bible. And there is a peculiar superhuman spirit appearing in the truths and precepts of this priceless record. Examine the purity and justice of its moral law, which is the only correct standard in morals; its account of the divine solicitude for the sins of men, and the means used to promote upright conduct; its clear ideas of the mercy of the divine Father; its wonderful analysis of the character of man, his state of sin and the change necessary to salvation; the peculiar character of redeemed souls; the certain punishment of wrong doing; the divine promises and their influences on the heart; its consolation in trials and suffering, and in 
death. 

These truths are above and beyond the reach of unaided human reason, and in themselves prove divine origin of the holy scriptures. And still there is the prophecy, the telling of coming events; the rise and fall of nations; the coming of the Messiah, his conception, birth, reception, by a few, rejection by the many, his labor, toil, trials, affliction, suffering, death, resurrection and ascension— the fulfilment of which compel our reverence, strengthens our hope and establishes our belief. 

But in this day there are many enemies of the Bible. And possibly the greatest enemies of the truth are those who profess to be Christians. We live in an age of down-grade-ism relative to the truth as clearly taught in the scriptures. Paul prophesied that such a time would come. The higher, destructive critics, the evolutionist, the modernist, and the fatalist seem bent on destroying the truths of the Bible and making ship-wreck if possible of that faith which was once delivered unto the saints. But they shall not succeed. God will care for His own. "He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up. 

Every prophecy written therein shall be fulfilled. If it were not of God it would come to naught. Other books come and go. And the Bible only remains to tell us all we know about creation, about the antediluvian period and subsequent ages of the world down to the time of Herodotus, the father of history. It covers a period of four thousand years or more from the morning of creation to the establishment of Christianity in all parts of the Roman empire. It contains the richest gems of human genius, wisdom and experience. It uses all forms of literary composition from the highest heights of eloquence to the plainest speech of the unlearned. 

In it are measured all states and conditions of life, for the moving Spirit was acquainted with every grief and every woe. It touches every cord of sympathy, is suited to every class of society, contains the spiritual biography of every human heart, and makes no more of the king than it does of the beggar. It is without conception the most remarkable book in existence, and will never be duplicated. 

And let us not be moved from its teaching by fear or favor. Let us contend for the full inspiration of the Scriptures from beginning to end, for if a part of the Bible is false, it would be an unsafe road to travel. But it is not unsafe. The danger is in departing from its teaching. It is a perfect law—converting the soul; a sure testimony, making wise the simple; righteous statutes, rejoicing the heart, and in the observing of them there is great reward. Written for our learning, let us often resort thither and gather pearls from its pure fountain, and we shall, "through patience and comfort of the scriptures" have hope, and continue to sing:
How precious is the book divine,
By inspiration given!
Bright as a lamp its doctrines shine
To guide our souls to heaven.

It sweetly cheers our drooping hearts
In this dark vale of tears; 
Comfort, and light, and joy imparts,
And quells our rising fears.

This lamp through all the tedious night 
Of life shall guide our way,
Till we behold the clearer light
Of an eternal day.
EDITORIAL No. 2

	The Word Comfort—Its Meaning

The word "comfort" is found in the Bible sixty-five times. It means to give cheer, to encourage, to console. God's children on the shores of time need encouragement, consolation, and cheer along the way. And they have it. Paul said,"We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down but not destroyed; always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in us." (2 Cor. 4: 8-10). 

Thus we see that amid all the trials and afflictions of this life there is to be found some comfort. Perplexed we shall be, but we shall not despair of a brighter day; persecutions we shall meet, but we shall not be forsaken of the Lord; cast down by the enemies of truth, but they cannot destroy us. And while we somehow in our hearts know all this by the revelation of Jesus Christ to us as our hope, yet we need these truths written for our learning—and these "things were written aforetime" for that very purpose. We know that God has not shut Himself up in the Scriptures, but has in them revealed Himself as He has not in any other way.  

The Scriptures testify of Him and His wonderful works.  We know, “The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament showeth His handiwork,” but we know it better by having God’s inspired servant write it in the Psalms for us.  We know that, “Day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto night showeth knowledge,” and that “There is no speech nor language where their voice is not heard,” but we understand better how God reveals Himself by the language of the day and the night, when we read about it in his word.

We know that Jesus said, “If ye love me, keep my commandments.  And I will pray the Father, and He will give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you forever, even the Spirit of Truth, whom the world cannot receive.”  Yet it is cheering to us to go to His written word from time to time and re-read these precious promises.  This Comforter is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father hath sent in the name of Christ.  He is the great Teacher, taking the things of Jesus, revealing them to us and bringing them to our remembrance.  (John 14:16-17-26).

This teacher puts His law in the mind, and writes them in the heart.  And the people need not go about, saying, “Know the Lord,” for all the house of Israel and the house of Judah shall know Him, from the least to the greatest of them. (Heb. 8:6-11).

But believing these truths—believing that God will reach and teach every one of His children in every clime the world over—we rejoice and are comforted to read them in the inspired word.  And when it comes to the matter of a personal salvation—the salvation of poor sinners as we are—we know, according to our own experience, and the revelation we have had of our helpless and sinful condition, that salvation must be alone by God’s unmerited favor.  But we love to read Paul’s testimony on the subject, when he said, “By grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves; it is the gift of God; not of works, lest any man should boast.” (Eph. 2:8,9).

We sometimes can say like one of old, and with full assurance, “I know that my Redeemer liveth.”  But we want to read in God’s word the testimony given by His children, and see if we can find that their testimony agrees with our feelings, and the testimony we are giving.  Sometimes, when upon the mountain-top of rejoicing, we say in our heart, if not with our lips, “The Lord is my Shepherd; I shall not want.”  But we are comforted to know that David felt that way, for he, too, was a sinner. And then sometimes, when we are in darkness—when we cannot see the light, and the billows of sorrow are rolling over us, we are again comforted because David, this same sweet singer of Israel, said, "Will the Lord cast off forever? and will He be favorable no more? Is His mercy clean gone forever? Doth His promise fail for evermore? Hath God forgotten to be gracious? Hath He in anger shut up His tender mercies?" (Psa. 77: 7-9). 

We believe David was a child of God, and that he is in heaven, where he still sings of praise to "the God of our salvation" ; and so we are encouraged and press on, praying and waiting for the "consolation of Israel."

As we turn to the Scriptures the first use we find made of the word "comfort" is in Gen. 5: 29. Lamech was the father of Noah. It is said of him, "And he called his name Noah, saying, This same shall comfort us concerning our work and toil of our hands, because of the ground which the Lord hath cursed." 

God cursed the ground because of man's sin, and said unto Adam, "In sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life." Noah's father spoke of his son in the spirit of prophecy, seeing the rest and comfort and safety that God should in the future bring about through him. The name Noah signifies rest and comfort. Rest gives comfort, and comfort flows from rest. Jewish history relates that Noah invented instruments for ploughing the land, that before his day the ground was broken up by spades and such like things, but by the use of the plough and beasts to draw it, their lives were made more easy and comfortable. 

And Noah was the first one to plant a vineyard, (Gen. 9: 20), and in many ways seemed to have been a great blessing and comfort to the people in a temporal way. And surely he was in a spiritual manner for he was a type of the Saviour in that he "prepared an Ark to the saying of his house." That Ark saved the bodies of every member of Noah's family from death—Jesus prepared the Ark which shall not only save (resurrect) the bodies of every member of the Fathers' family, but in which shall also their "whole spirit and soul and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ." And He delivers from the curse of the law and the bondage of it, and from toiling and seeking for a righteousness by the works of it. 

As Noah brought rest and comfort in temporal things, so Jesus brings rest and comfort not only in temporal things, but also in things spiritual and eternal. And the knowledge of these facts are a great comfort to us as we go forward seeking a city to come, which hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God. 
EDITORIAL No. 3 

The Bible A Wonderful Revelation

The subject of the Bible is a wonderful subject. It tells us about the beginning of things. The first verse says, "In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth." The wisdom of this world can never tell us how this was done, because the world by wisdom knows not God. For centuries worldly wisdom has been speculating. One theory is set up by one generation to be torn down by another. Much is known, and much can be learned, but there is a limit to man's knowledge. His mind is bounded and held within a limit like the waves of the ocean, of which God said, "Hitherto shalt thou come, but no further; and here shalt thy proud waves be staid." (Job 38: 11). Man's finite mind cannot look back before the beginning of earthly things, for "In the beginning" has reference to God's work of creation and not the Creator. With Him there is no beginning. Nor can man look beyond death—the dark gulf that separates this life from another—only as God may, for a little moment, lift the curtain that His servants may see things too wonderful to utter as Paul did. (2 Cor. 12: 4). 

Nor can man with all of his wisdom, ingenuity and skill create one thing. He can, by applying the laws of nature, change one material into another. But he cannot create, nor can he destroy in the sense of annihilation. All he can do is to work with the material God has placed in this material world. In modern times many wonderful inventions have come to light. By the harnessing of electricity man travels with ease on the sea, under the sea and above the sea. His food is cooked, his home lighted and his horseless carriage is driven; his voice is heard thousands of miles away, and soon, through electrical appliance his form will be seen the same distance. 

Wonderful things are done through the application of this power called "electricity". But what is electricity? Webster did not know. He said it was "the agency to which are due numerous phenomena in physics ascribed to the action of certain hypothetical media, but which modern theorists are inclined to regard as arising from strains or displacements in the luminiferous ether." So men do not know what this power is, they theorize about it, and call it electricity. It seems to be everywhere, for it can be collected by the spinning of the dynamoes, the action of chemicals, or the rubbing of a cat's back. 

But God knows all about it. He made it and placed it here. He turns loose His thunderbolts in the heavens and the earth trembles. But He controls it just like He controls the old ocean. And herein is our safety. And herein is comfort. And the highest wisdom in all the world is the wisdom of faith, faith in God, for "Through faith we understand that 

the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that things that are seen were not made of things which do appear." (Heb. 11: 3).

The Scriptures! How wonderful! Wonderful because they are inspired by Him who made all things, upholds all things, over-rules all things. Wonderful because they testify of Jesus. And wonderful too, because He expounds them unto His children. Luke (24: 27) said "And beginning at Moses and all the prophets, He expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things concerning Himself." This particular instance was after His resurrection as He walked to Emmaus with two who loved Him. Reader, do you love Him? If so, He walks with you from time to time and opens up the Scriptures to your understanding. They said, "Did not our heart burn within us, while He talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the Scriptures?" 

And does not your heart often burn within you as you are enabled to see the beauty of God's word wherein is told the matchless Story of the Cross, that plan of salvation conceived in the Eternal Mind and worked out by the man Christ-Jesus, and which is the only hope of immortal glory of poor hell-deserving sinners as you have felt yourself to be? But there is comfort for the sorrowing, a physician for the sin-sick, heavenly manna for the hungry, water of life for the famishing, rest for the weary, and a safe heavenly port for the tempest-tossed mariner. Therefore, "Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith your God. Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned; for she hath received of the Lord's hand double for all her sins." (Isa. 40 : 1-2). "My people."—God then has a people. And He choose them from the fallen race of Adam—"Elect according to the foreknowledge of the Father." He gave them to His Son :"All the Father giveth me shall come to me," said Jesus. And those given to Jesus He will safely house in heaven without the loss of a single one, for the Master said, "My Father, which gave them me, is greater than all; and no man is able to pluck them out of my Father's hand." 

Is not this a comfort to those who hope in His mercy? "Tell my people that her warfare is accomplished,"—not to be accomplished, but is accomplished. Jesus accomplished it. He finished the work. He won the victory. He is our Captain of salvation. And "Cry unto her that her iniquity is pardoned." Surely He hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows. Surely He was wounded for our transgressions and bruised for our iniquities. Surely He saw the travail of His soul and was satisfied, for by His stripes we are healed. 

And again—"Tell my people"—the church, that "she hath received of the Lord's hand double for all her sins." A double portion—double blessings. Blessings here, in this world—(for every good gift comes from Him,)—providential care, food and raiment—blessings innumerable so that we can with David sing, "Bless the Lord, 0 my soul: and all that is within me, bless His holy name. Bless the Lord, 0 my soul, and forget not all His benefits." 

And too, His blessings in grace, washed and cleansed and made meet for a better world; eyes to see Him, a heart to love Him, and ears to hear the joyful sound of salvation through Him. And in the end; not only to be pardoned of our sins, but also justified, so that we shall be pure and holy, "For he hath made Him to be sin for us, who knew no .sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in Him." (2 Cor. 5: 21).

Robert G. Ingersoll, a man of great intellect, wrote the following poem :

"And so we love and hope and dream
That in death's sky there is a gleam.
We ask, yet nothing seems to know: we cry in vain There is no master of the show who will explain
Or from the future tear the mask; 
And yet we dream and still we ask.

"Is there beyond the silent night an endless day? 
Is death a door that leads to light? We cannot say.
The tongueless secret locked in fate 
We do not know. We hope and wait."

Ingersoll's mind was bright, but his soul was darkened. "The natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned." Sad and pathetic indeed, to have this questioning, this doubting and faithless spirit, when one faces the inevitable departure from this world. And what a contrast there is as we turn from Ingersoll's questionings to the strong and abiding faith of the Apostle Paul. In our imagination we can hear him preaching:

"Behold, I show you a mystery; we shall not all sleep but we shall all be changed. In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump, for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed. For this 'corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality. So when this corruption shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory. 0 death, where is thy sting? 0 grave, where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin; and the strength of sin is the law. But thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ." "Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye also, being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your steadfastness. But grow in grace, and in knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ." (2 Pet. 3 : 17-18.)
EDITORIAL No. 4

God's Providence in War

The poet beautifully expressed a truth when he wrote:

"God moves in a mysterious way, 
His wonders to perform;
He plants His footsteps in the sea, 
And rides upon the storm".

Another poet writes:

"Lord God of hosts, whose Almighty hand 
Dominion holds on sea and land, 
In peace and war Thy will we see 
Shaping the larger liberty. 
Nations may rise and nations fall, 
Thy changeless purpose rules them all."

And in this article I want to give some evidences of God's hand in war, for "Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee; the remainder of wrath shalt thou restrain." (Psa. 76: 107).

It is reported that in the darkest hour of the World War someone asked King George, "How will it end?" He replied, "God will have to work a miracle." And apparent to thousands, God did, for one report says:

"It was at four o'clock on the afternoon of April 22, 1915, that the Germans at Ypres turned loose for the first time their deadly poisonous gas on the allies. It was all unexpected and the allied armies, all unprotected fell in windrows. They were piled up like bloated cord wood. All Germany now needed to do was to march through, take the English channel, and the world was hers. Then, why didn't she do it? And why was this particular time selected to turn loose the gas? It was not the military, but the meteorological authorities that fixed the hour. Dr. Schmaus, the head of the meteorological department announced to the German general in charge that the direction of the winds was fixed and settled for thirty-six hours to come, and they would carry the gas far out over the allied lines. So the gas was turned loose—when, all of a sudden, it whirled and flung it self back over the German army. And the Germans, gasping, strangling, staggered by the thousands to their death. Dr. Schmaus, in his official report said, ('In forty years of meteorological records of the German government the wind never acted so peculiarly before.') And the doubly strange and striking thing was that the wind whirled in only a small area."

And again in the darkest days of June Austria and Germany had swept down the Alps to crush Italy. Just before them is Venice, the heart of Italy. It seems if Venice could have been taken Italy would soon be under the heel of Germany, and the Allies would have lost. And nothing lay between the on-rushing victorious German and Austrian armies except the inferior forces of Gen'l. Diaz and the Piave river. In their mad rush the Austrians and Germans, poured over the small river, taking no food with them, for the granaries of Italy were just ahead. They got within six miles of Venice. But just then, out of what had been a dead dry sky an hour ago, burst thundering clouds and torrents of rain. Within a few hours the Piave was a racing, roaring, mad wide sea, sweeping before it boats, bridges, everything—even whole battalions of Austrian and Germans are said to have been swept to the sea. The remainder were cut off without supplies, a great terror seized them, and the Italians captured or killed more than forty-thousand. Italy was saved, and Gen'l. Diaz said, "God did it." 

It was in Nov. 1917 when the German submarine strength was at its tide. For a year they had been turning them out, and now they claimed to have enough submarines to sweep the seas of American ships and soldiers, and in their daily papers they claimed the war was already won by their submarine warfare. But just then, reports tell us that the seas rolled and raged and would not cease, and the submarines, unable to return to their bases, were forced to come to the surface and were captured or sunk—one hundred and ninety-nine, with three thousand of their crew, and the back of the German submarine warfare was broken, and Germany lost.

And too, a strange thing happened during the German's first mad rush on Paris Sept. 1914. They were in sight of Paris. The Kaiser through his glass could plainly see Eiffel Tower. The French had but eight hours' ammunition. The orders were already given, "When the last round is fired every man take to his heels." Eight hours—and the war is done, for the Germans will soon be in Paris. But all of a sudden the Germans ceased firing, and did not begin again for forty-seven hours. And for forty-seven hours the French reenforced their position with every available soldier and a fresh supply of ammunition, and when the Germans renewed their attack they were pounded back and never in four years were as close to Paris again. The German Generals reported they did not know why they ceased firing. 

The Bible answers—"So far shalt thou come, and no farther." "Thus saith the Lord concerning this wicked king, He shall not come into this city. By the way that he came, by 

the same way shall he return. He shall not come into this city, saith the Lord, for I will defend this city to save it." And Germany lost.

And here is another remarkable report in regard to Germany's food supply. Read it: "By the spring of 1917 the German scientists had solved the problem of growing food and grain, and perfected it as it had never before been perfected in the history of the world. They announced that Germany would have the potato crop of all time; that they had put in each potato hill that which would kill every enemy of the potato under ground and above ground. And how the potatoes of Germany grew! When those uncounted acres and miles were in blossom, lo, a blight theretofore unknown swept over the potato fields of Germany, and in a day they were scorched, scabbed, shriveled as though fire-swept! and hungry Germany learned the bitter truth utter by Napoleon, ('An army travels on its belly, and will not travel when that belly is empty.') A mutiny broke loose in the army forced the abdication of the kaiser and brought the armistice. Ludendorf, in his history of the war, says that it was the failure of the potato crop of 1917 that lost Germany the war."

The world recognized that Germany was superior in the air, and yet as the world knows, and Germany conceded, that she was worsted in the air the last few months of the war. The head of the aerial service explained this, saying:

"The allies did not have superior airships nor fighters, but it was the accursed clouds that defeated us. Nearly every time when we had a bevy of the enemy's ships in a pocket ready to take them, one of those accursed clouds would be hanging handy by and would envelop them as thick as a blanket, and the devil himself couldn't find them, and they would escape at their leisure. It was the accursed clouds that did it." He spoke by the records. "My clouds shall curse them in that day, saith the Lord." Many of our boys who were in the air service report the same thing—"that just when they were in a tight corner a cloud coming from nobody knew where, would screen them.

A recent writer on Civil War matters has this to say of the battle of Gettysburg:

"Lee, in his official report of the battle of Gettysburg says that if he had followed up his advantage of the second day by attacking early the third he would easily have won. But he didn't attack the third day until three o'clock, giving Meade plenty of time to recast his lines, throw up his defenses, reform his forces. And when Lee did attack he went to his defeat and the death of the Confederacy. Lee, in his report says, `I do not know why I waited until three o'clock in the afternoon.' God is the answer. 

When Napoleon all but has Waterloo won, he cries, `Oh, why doesn't Grouchee come?' Grouchee? He lay off yonder with thirty-five thousand of the picked soldiers of  France. Napoleon sent him an urgent message to come. True, the messenger was captured and Grouchee never received the message, but for hours he heard the bombardment and knew that the battle was on, and yet he did not move. His officers and generals begged him to go, pleaded with him, besought him with tears, threatened him, but he did not move. He was twice tried by the French Council of War, and he was charged with having deliberately betrayed France and Napoleon. He denied it. He said he was a true Frenchman and was loyal to Napoleon, but he said he could not explain why he didn't go. God is the answer."

I quote below further proof of God's dealing with nations and protection of His people in war:

"When the children of Israel were caught with the sea on the left side, the high mountains on the right, and the army of Pharaoh behind them—every way closed except up—they cried mightily to God, and God dropped a thick cloud between them, which to the Egyptians was a black wall, but the Israelites were like an aurora borealis. All the night the Israelites by the light of that cloud beheld Jehovah with his spade, divinely made, digging, through dry shod, while all that time the Egyptians battered their heads against the wall of that cloud. "A cloud came between them." 

"He commandeth the clouds." "The Lord rideth upon the clouds." "The clouds are his." "The clouds are dust of his feet." "He maketh the clouds his chariot." One hundred and sixty-two times the Book speaks of God's doings and dealings with the clouds. Germany was beaten on the sea, beaten on the land, and beaten in the sir, because, "Behold the sea, the earth, and the sky, they are mine, saith the Lord." 

Germany ventured on the wrong reserves and lost.
"Those that the gods would destroy they first made mad." In those early days of the war, Germany could easily have cut through to the channel port and had England at her mercy. But, blinded and maddened like a mad and blind bull, the Germans struck for Paris. They never reached Paris, and they never reached the channel ports, later trying to do, they paid the price of nearly two million men; for Germany knew she must have the ports of the English channel to win the war. Six weeks after she began the war she might have possessed every foot of the channel, but mad and blinded, she plunged Paris-ward, for the Kaiser must have his "Christmas dinner in Paris."  

The only possible explanation is—Germany was mad. "Let them alone," saith the Lord. "They are the blind leading the blind, and if the blind lead the blind they shall both fall in the ditch." Mad and blinded, she struck for Paris, and that gave England time to get 

between the channel and the enemy, and there she stood for four long years with her back to the wall, and Germany lost.

And there were some remarkable coincidences when the armistice was called between the warring nations. It was the eleventh day of the eleventh month (1918). And the eleventh verse of the eleventh chapter of the eleventh book of the Bible has this to say: "Forasmuch as this is done, oh king, and thou hast not kept my covenants and my statutes, which I have commanded thee, I will surely rend the kingdom from thee, and give to thy servant." (1 Kings 11:11). And if that was ever done to any nation and any ruler, it was done to Germany and the Kaiser.
Germany had for many years taught that might made right. She had forsaken Christ for Krupp. She had turned from the cross of Calvary to the cross of iron; and her doom was sounded. The cross of Christ points the only way for nations and individuals, for it is Christ or chaos. He is our only hope of victory over self, the world and the devil. 

How beautifully the Psalmist expresses the truth when he said, "When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars, which thou hast ordained; what is man that thou art mindful of him? And the son of man, that thou visitest him? (Psa. 8: 3-4). And yet God is mindful of us. He who notes the sparrows fall, and numbers the hairs of our head, will manifest himself to those whose trust is in him as "an ever present help in time of need." "Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time: casting all your care upon him: for he careth for you:" (1 Pet. 5:6-7). And may we all, dear readers, when troubles arise and the night is dark, be able to say with full assurance, "The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid? Though an host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear; though war should arise against me, in this will I be confident." (Psa. 27:1, 3). May we through patience and comfort of the scripture rejoice more and more in the sweet hope of our heavenly Father's care over us here on the shores of time and of his salvation of us when we "go hence, and be no more."
EDITORIAL No. 5 

Some Speculations of Men Exposed

All of us are concerned about salvation, how obtained, how one may know when he is in possession of it—what it will lead to, etc. We all know that we are creatures of time—that we are pilgrims and strangers here, and that we shall soon cross "the great divide" that separates this life from another. Then, if pilgrims and strangers, seeking a City which hath foundations, we are constantly in need of a Guide-Book—a book that contains information that is reliable. Such a book has never been produced by the wisdom of this world, and we dare not trust our eternal destiny to the wisest philosophers or the most learned scientist. 

But, we trust Divine revelation. We go to the Bible for "It contains the mind of God, the state of man, the way of salvation, the doom of sinners and happiness of believers. Its doctrines are holy, its precepts are binding, its histories are true, and its decisions are immutable. Read it to be wise, believe it to be safe, and practice it to be holy. It contains light to direct you, food to support you, and comfort to cheer you. It is the travelers map, the pilgrim's staff, the pilot's compass, the soldier's sword, and the Christian's chart. Christ is its grand subject, our good its design, and the glory of God its end. It should fill the memory, rule the heart, and guide the feet. Read it slowly, frequently, prayerfully. It is a mine of wealth, a paradise of glory, and a river of pleasure. It is given you in life, will be opened at the judgment and be remembered forever. It involves the highest; responsibility, rewards the greatest labor, and condemns all who trifles with its holy contents."

Now if this be true, and I believe it is, great will be the condemnation of those who seek to be wise above that which is written therein and undertake to establish a "Gospel of Dirt" in the place of this Gospel of Truth. And as an example of this so-called Higher Criticism— this denial of the record of man's creation by the God of all wisdom and power as recorded by Moses under divine inspiration, I quote below a paragraph from an editorial in the Jan. No. of The New Science and Invention, a scientific magazine:

"Life began on this planet the minute the earth had formed a solid crust and had cooled off so that water would not boil on its surface. At that time evolution on this planet commenced. Just how life actually began at first it is impossible to tell now. The reason is that we do not know what life really is. But it seems probable that the first living creatures came from the muck and slime collected by sea waters on beaches. In other words, life first came out of the depths of the ocean. This seems pretty well established today. Man is 

a descendent of fish. Man's spine and the spine of a fish are in principle the same. Even man's hair can be directly traced to fish scales."

I wonder how the writer knew that life began just as the water stopped boiling. He confesses, however, that "just how life actually began at first it is impossible to tell now." Maybe he will tell us in his next issue. The reason he cannot tell now is because he "does not know what life really is." He concluded though, that the first living creature came from the muck and slime, etc. Now reader, turn to the first chapter of the Bible and read the inspired record of creation. No muck and slime theology, no science, falsely so called, there ! No supposition or guess-work undertaking to prove that because a fish has a back-bone somewhat like a man, therefore man descended from the fish tribe! 

Man also has a back-bone somewhat like a mule—Is this any proof that man descended from the mule? Paul said "All flesh is not the same flesh; but there is one kind of flesh of men, another flesh of beasts, another of fish, and another of birds." How much more God-honoring and inspiring is the Bible explanation of the earth and the different forms of life! "And God said, `Let us make man in our own image, after our likeness"'. * * * "So God created man in His own image, in the image of God created He him; male and female created He them." No muck and slime, no tad-pole and frog—no monkey and mule origin of man in the Bible account of his creation. Let Baptists everywhere contend for the teaching of the Bible. 

Let none be swept into the current of the Darwinian theory of Evolution. And right here I believe I will quote a little bit of Darwin's history. It was written by Thomas Carlyle, the great English writer who was born in 1795 and died in 1881. He was a leading essayist and historian, whose many works are still used and loved by millions of the best thinkers. Not long before his death Carlyle who knew Darwin well, wrote the following:
"I have known three generations of the Darwins—grand-father, father and son—atheists all. The brother of the famous naturalist, a quiet man who lives not far from here, told me that among his grand-father's effects he found a seal engraven with this legend `omni ex conchis' (everything from a clam shell) ! I saw the naturalist not many months ago; told him that I read his `Origin of Species' and other books; that he had by no means satisfied me that we were descended from monkeys, but had gone far to persuade me that he and his so-called scientific brethren had brought the present generation very near to monkeys.

"A good sort of man is this Darwin, and well meaning but with very little intellect. It is a sad and terrible thing to see nigh a whole generation of men and women, professing to be cultivated, looking around in a purblind fashion, and finding no God in the universe. I suppose it is a reaction from the reign of cant and hollow pretense, professing to believe what in fact they do not believe. 

And this is what we have got to—all things from frog spawn—the Gospel of Dirt, that is the order of the day. The older I grow—and now I stand on the brink of eternity—the more comes back to me the sentence in the Catechism which I learned when a child, and the fuller and the deeper its meaning becomes; `what is the chief end of man? To glorify God and to enjoy Him forever." No Gospel of Dirt, teaching that men have descended from frogs through monkeys, can ever set that aside."

What a comfort it is to turn from the speculations of men to the certainties of the Bible. Darwinism offers no reason for existence, and presents no philosophy of life; the Bible tells why man is here, tells how he was created and gives a code of morals for every human need. 

Darwin was an atheist, and if he believed in any god at all, it was one of his own imagination. He bowed down to nature, rather than to nature's God. He worshiped the creature, rather than the Creator. He gazed through the eyes of nature at things seen—not through the eyes of faith at things unseen. And there are today many worldly-wise men who, like Darwin, would enthrone human reason and destroy faith in the inspired word of God, were it possible. But thank God it is not possible, for Faith is a gift of God, a fruit of the Spirit, and His spirit born children will, in a measure, bear this blessed "Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that things which are seen were not made of things which do appear." (Heb. 11: 2). Our God is the Creator, Upholder, and Preserver of the Universe and all things therein, and we can with the Psalmist say, "Fret not thyself because of evil doers, neither be thou envious against the workers of iniquity. For they shall soon be cut down like the grass, and wither as the green herb. Trust in the Lord, and do good ; so shalt thou dwell in the land, and verily thou shalt be fed. (Psa. 37: 1-3). 

"Blessed is the man that maketh the Lord his trust, and respecteth not the proud, nor such as turn aside to lies." Let us not turn aside to lies, but rest in the promises of God. He will take care of us in this world and provide a blessed home for us in that fruit. And while science can never explain the existence of things, yet God's trusting children like Paul can say, life beyond this natural existence. "0 fear the Lord, ye his saints: for there is no want to them that fear him." (Psa. 34: 8).
EDITORIAL No. 6 

Some Evidences of Spiritual Life

In my last article on this subject I said that all of us are concerned about salvation—how obtained, how one may know when he is in possession of it, etc. And then I tried to point the reader to the only safe Guide Book, the Bible; and also to warn him against the danger of false theories, especially that called Evolution. And I think it is needful to tell God's children of the evil and dangerous things as well as to tell them of the safe and good things. 

The truth must be preached—if preached effectively, both in a positive and a negative way. That is, the embassador of Christ must tell the people what truth is, and then tell them what it is not. This is the way the Master taught. He pronounced blessings on the meek, the humble, the faithful. But he pronounced woes on the scribes, Pharisees and hypocrites. "Woe unto you," He said, "for you devour widows' houses, and for a pretense make long prayers; you compass sea and land to make one proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him two fold more the child of hell than yourselves." "Ye pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith." "Ye make clean outside of the cup and of the platter, but within they are full of extortion and excess." "Ye are like unto whited sepulchers, which indeed are beautiful without, but are within full of dead men's bones." "Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell?" No doubt these proud boasters thought that they were in no immediate danger of hell, and if they should ever become so, they knew how to escape. Only a matter of performing the deeds of the law. 

Thus Paul, the Pharisee, thought. But Paul the Apostle, learned differently. And he taught different too. Hear him tell about how we possess salvation:"Not by works of righteousness which we have done." This is negative teaching—telling how it is not. Well, then; how are we saved? "But according to His mercy He saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost." 

This is positive teaching—telling how it is. And what can be more plainly taught than the plan of salvation? But this teacher gives us another example of the right way, and cautions against the wrong way—"For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that (faith) not of yourselves: it is the gift of God." This is positive. "Not of works, lest any man should boast." This is negative. Now Primitive Baptists are established in the doctrine of salvation by grace. And in this God-honoring doctrine they rejoice. They rejoice to know that the matter of salvation from sin is in the hands of One who is Mighty to save. His name shall be called Jesus, for He shall save. He cannot fail; failure is never written on the works of Omnipotence. "He shall see the travail of his soul and shall be satisfied." "My righteous servant shall justify many." "My Father, which gave them me, is greater than all; and no man is able to pluck them out of my Father's hand." "I give unto them eternal life and they shall never perish." "I am the good Shepherd; the good Shepherd giveth his life for the sheep." 

Then if there be a God in heaven, and His Son came to save His people, then these sheep the Shepherd gave his life for, will be saved. Of this there cannot be the shadow of a doubt in the mind of every Spirit-taught child. Believing there is a God, and that He reigns and rules and does all of His pleasure; believing that Jesus Christ is His Son, and that this Son came on earth to do His Father's will, which will was that of all the Father gave Him He should lose nothing, and believing that as the Executor of that will every provision was fulfilled— every heir whose name was found therein was fully provided for—believing these truths, one can but rejoice in them, and praise God from whom all blessings flow. 

This is a doctrine of comfort and of joy unspeakable and full of glory; of strength in time of weakness; of light in nights of darkness to every child of God.

But can we, in this time state, know that we are the children of God? The answer to this question is a broad field of experimental truth based on the evidences of spiritual life. And the evidence that will satisfy us at one time will not do so at another time. 

Paul tells the Thessalonian brethren how they knew their election. "For," says he, "our gospel came not unto you in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance." (1 Thess. 1: 4-5). Have you ever heard a man preach the gospel of salvation whose preaching was like food to the hungry, or water to the thirsty? And was it attended with a manifest power in the preacher and a heart-felt power in you which humbled you and at the same time lifted you up? And were you assured that he was preaching the truth and that the plan of salvation by grace would not fail to save every heir of God, whether it embraced you or not? If you have heard, and felt such preaching, you may know "your election". The non-elect do not rejoice in the sovereignty of God and the sure salvation of His choice.

John, the Apostle of love, tells us another way we may
know, "We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren. He that loveth not his
brother abideth in death." (1st John 3: 14). The love of the brethren is not the cause of our passing from a state of death in sin to a state of life in Christ, but is the effect of it—the evidence of it. Brotherly love is a wonderful thing. It is a fruit of the Spirit of God. Being regenerated, we love God. And if we love God we love His children also, for "every one. that loveth him that begat, loveth him also that is begotten of him." (1st John 5: 1). This love for God's humble children shows itself as soon as anything in a regenerate man. Nor can any one love God's children, as such, as brethren and sisters in Christ, unless he is born again. An unregenerate person may indeed love a saint, as a good neighbor, or natural relative, or for some excellent quality, as a man of learning, candor, civility, kindness, etc.; but to love him as a child of God, because he bears the image of Christ, believes his truth, and is walking in his footsteps, no man can do this, unless he has received the grace of God and is himself born into the royal family. 

And so this love for God's people is a sure evidence that we are born again. But while we ofttimes rejoice in this mark of the child of God and find comfort in the thought that we possess it, because we dare not deny that we love those who love Jesus and bear His image, yet we say in our mind, and sometimes with our lips, "I do not love them as I should." But did you know to say this feelingly, is a confession of love? It is a good husband, who in tender regard for his wife, confesses that he should love her more devotedly. It is the good wife who desires to show more regard and love for her husband.  And so to be concerned over the regard we have for our brethren in Christ and want to love them more and serve them better, is a bright evidence that we really are members of His royal family. "Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God! therefore the world knoweth us not, because it knew Him not." "My little children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue; but in deed, and in truth." 

Is it not a great comfort, dear reader, to feel in your heart a love for God and His children, for thereby you may know you are one of the redeemed of the Lord.
EDITORIAL No. 7 

Further Evidences of Spiritual Life

One said of Paul and Silas, "These men are servants of the most high God, which shew unto us the way of salvation." (Acts. 16:17). This showing the way of salvation is a part of the gospel, whether written or spoken, and a very prominent part. God's children need to be shown the way. But there are other things they also need to be taught. It is one thing to see the way of salvation and another thing to know that we are in that way. For the line of demarcation between the right way and the wrong way, the broad way and the narrow way, is so close that it is easy to become confused. The evidences of spiritual life are sometimes so faint that they are difficult to detect. When a boy I heard with interest my father relate the apparent lifeless condition of soldiers on the field of battle. He was a soldier in the war between the States and it became his duty at times to help bury the dead and to remove the wounded to places provided for their care. Sometimes he and his assistants would find an apparently lifeless body. The man would have the appearance of death, but upon examination there would be a faint heart beat, and sometimes a faint whisper,"water, water." The poor soldier was too far gone to see or hear, or understand. But there was an unquenchable thirst for water, because he lived. He begged for water,  not in order that he might live, but because he was living. And so it is with the higher spiritual life This spiritual life is a gift of God. God's children are begotten of him. They are born from above. And as soon as born there are evidences of life. Others can see these evidences better than the one possessing them. There is a hungering and thirsting for something they have not. This is because they have life, and life demands food and water. And Jesus said, "Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness; for they shall be filled." They are in a blessed condition because they have eternal life, yet they may not know it. 

Like the wounded soldier faintly asking for water, or the infant crying for nourishment they do not have to see, and hear and understand to be living creatures. This hearing, and seeing, and believing, and understanding comes sometimes by revelation and sometimes by a growth in grace and knowledge. Paul had a most wonderful revelation from heaven. Peter said "But grow in grace , and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ." But the point I want to clarify is that the least, the faintest evidence of spiritual life, should be a source of great joy and comfort to the child of God. So many of God's children overlook these little evidences of the Christian's life. And sometimes we ministers, maybe, spend too little time in proving to God's children that they are his. 

It was Huntington, I believe, the gifted grace preacher of England, who while on his way to Chapel complained to his friend of the barren condition of his mind, and asked "What shall I preach about today?" His friend replied, "Prove to me that I am a Christian." 

The preacher who can do this convincingly, is a gifted preacher, and will be a church builder. Jesus when walking by the sea of Galilee saw Peter and Andrew casting their net into the sea, and said to them, "Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men." It is a great work to be fishers of men, to cast into the sea of life the gospel net and catch in it the children of God, and separate them from the world. There should be a separation. John the Baptist did not baptize all who came to his baptism. He said to some, "Who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Bring forth fruits meet for repentance." He was a discerner of spirits, and separated the good from the bad. 

Some were caught by his preaching who were not ready for the kingdom. Jesus said, "the kingdom of heaven is like unto a net, that was cast into the sea, and gathered of every kind; Which when it was full, they drew to the shore, and sat down, and gathered the good into vessels, but cast the bad away." Fishing did not change the nature, or condition, of the fish, but separated the good from the bad. Preaching does not change the nature, or condition of people, but should separate the good from the bad. The bad, the natural man, the unregenerate, who feels none of the evidences of spiritual life, none of the hungering and thirsting for righteousness and manifest none of the fruits of the spirit, love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance; have no place in the gospel church. But every one, "both great and small," who bear any of these fruits are the children of God. And they should be encouraged and comforted—even the smallest and most weakly of the flock. 

Eld. T. S. Dalton one time was preaching at a church in North Carolina on the 16th and 17th verses of the 3rd chapter of Malachi. As he described the marks of the child of God and mentioned in a special way those "that thought upon his name," a little girl sitting near her mother stood up and rejoiced aloud, saying, "Mother I did not know until now that I am a child of God." She had been thinking upon His name. She could not understand the wondrous plan of salvation as others could; she could not digest the strong doctrine of election, predestination, etc. ; but she had been hungering and thirsting after righteousness, and she knew she had been praying and thinking. And so was made to rejoice in the comforting thought that she was one of the Lord's little ones and would be gathered with His redeemed when He made up His jewels. To mourn because of a feeling sense of sin; to feel poor in spirit, meek and lowly; to hunger and thirst after righteousness; to be merciful and longsuffering; to desire to be pure in heart, honest in purpose and upright in walk; to love peace and to labor as a peacemaker ; to love God, his cause and his people; to possess even a little measure of faith and to believe in Jesus; to fear the Lord, speak to one another about his goodness, and to think upon his name, all of these are evidences of a divine work of grace in the soul. Dear reader, you should rejoice to possess any of these marks. If you, like Paul, have had some remarkable experience, thank God for it and tell it to the church. God gives some more than others, and where much is given much is required. 

But the more important thing for us to consider, is not how many talents have been given, but how well we are using the talents given. "Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse," God said to His people Israel, "and 'prove me * * * saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it." (Mal. 3). And Jesus said, "Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit; so shall ye be my disciples. As the Father hath loved me, so have I loved you; continue ye in my love. If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love; even as I have kept by Father's commandments, and abide in His love. These things have I spoken unto you, that my joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be full. This is my commandment, That ye love one another, as I have loved you. * * Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you." (John 15: 8-14). Having the sweet hope that Jesus is our everlasting Friend, let us prove our love to Him, not in word only, but in deed and in truth. His everlasting arms are underneath, and nothing shall be able to separate us from his love.
EDITORIAL No. 8 

Hope, the Anchor on the Sea of Time

In a previous article I called the readers' attention in a brief way to some of the marks of the child of God. This is a subject of great importance and needs to be explained to God's children that they may be encouraged and comforted along life's rugged way. For though we can at times see clearly the promises of God and apply them to ourselves, and with Job can say, "I know that my Redeemer liveth," yet at other times we are low down in the valley and with Toplady feel to sing:

"Encompassed with clouds of distress,
And tempted all hopes to resign, 
I pant for the light of Thy face,
That I in Thy beauty may shine; 
Disheartened with waiting so long,
I sink at Thy feet with my load: 
All plaintive I pour out my song,
And stretch forth my hands unto God."

As the clouds of doubt gather thick and fast and the Sun of Righteousness withdraws His light, we lose sight, for the time being, to the evidence of eternal life. And then it is we need Hope—that anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast which entereth into the veil (heaven) wherein Jesus the forerunner has entered. When the skies are clear, and the sea smooth, and the sun shining, the sailors  have no need for the anchor. So with the child of God on the Sea of Time. But when the storm is raging, and the night dark, and even the stars are hid from view and there is fear of being cast upon the rock bound shore of destruction, then it is that the anchor is cast forth, goes down to the bottom of the sea, takes hold of the very foundation and sinks deeper therein as the ship is tossed hither and thither upon the angry billows. And thus it is with the dear old church in this world of sin, thus it is with the child of God here in this time state—sometimes, tempest-tossed, fear-stricken, sin-burdened. But as the storms of life rage, deeper sinks the Anchor of Hope in the foundation of eternal truth, and with Paul we can say, "Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword?" * * * "Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him that loved us." 

And then Paul proceeds to express his firm conviction, saying, "For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord." (Rom. 8: 32-39). And, dear reader, is not this our firm conviction also? God has undertaken the salvation of His people and He cannot fail. And an abiding hope in His mercy is a bright mark of the Christian's character. The word "hope", is mentioned in the Bible one hundred and twenty seven times. And surely we have need for it. It is one of the most comforting experimental truths we can know. The sure salvation of every elect vessel of mercy is clearly taught in the Bible. We sometimes call it the final preservation, or the final perseverance of the saints; sometimes we say "once in grace, always in grace." Job expressed it this way: "The righteous also shall hold on his way." (Job. 18: 9). And Paul said "We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed but not in despair; persecuted but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed." 

And upon these inspired expressions is based the beautiful and experimental hymn entitled, "Preservation", beginning:

"Now in Thy praise eternal King, 
Be all my thoughts employed; 
While of this precious truth I sing, 
'Cast down but not destroyed'. "

And destroyed, or plucked from the hand of God, they shall never be. They "are kept by the power of God." No enemy can reach them, their lives "are hid with Christ in God." God purposed the salvation of every one that shall be saved. He is a God of purpose. "According to the eternal purpose which He purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord." (Eph. 3: 11). "Who hath saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to His own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began." (2 Tim. 1: 9). God's purpose to save includes some of all nations which He gave to His Son. And Jesus said "All the Father giveth me shall come to me." The angel said "thou shalt call his name Jesus; for he shall save his people from their sins." And Paul tells us that "it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the captain of their salvation perfect through suffering." (Heb. 11: 10). 

Jesus was a suffering Saviour, yet a perfect one. And a perfect Saviour performs a perfect work. If any part of the plan of salvation had to be performed by man it would be an imperfect plan. But the fulfilling of the Father's will was placed, not in the hands of men or angels, but in the hands of One that is mighty to save. "Unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given; and the government shall be upon his shoulder; and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor,   The Mighty God, The Everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace." (Isa. 9: 6). And this blessed Son saw the travail of His soul and was satisfied. If a single one that the Father gave Him should be lost He would not be satisfied. But the word "failure" shall never be written upon God's work. If God fails to execute his purpose, then he is not the Almighty. But we rejoice that the everlasting covenant cannot be broken. 

Malachi calls Jesus "the messenger of the covenant." He came to fulfill every provision and finished the work. He was the surety of this better covenant; the executor of his Father's will; our Advocate with the Father; Author and Finisher of our faith; Lion of the tribe of Judah; the Living stone ; the bread of life; the Lord our righteousness; the Maker and Preserver of all things; the bright and morning Star; the Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec; the Root and offspring of David; the Shepherd and Bishop of souls; the Same yesterday, today, and forever; the Great Shepherd of the sheep; the Captain of salvation, having all power in earth and in heaven.

Now, with such a Saviour, it would be sacrilegious to teach that a single one for whom Christ died and rose again will fail to reach the climes of immortal glory. The perishing of one soul, redeemed by the blood of Christ would bring such dishonor to Jesus, and such victory for devils, that the thought itself is blasphemy. God save us from such unbelief and enable us to ever rejoice in the triumphs of grace. 0 what a comfort to believe these truths, to rest in His promises, to find shelter in the cleft of the Rock, to see Him as the chiefest among ten thousand and altogether lovely, to touch the hem of His garment and receive virtue and to have His felt presence when all creature help fails. We poor worms of the dust can never be worthy of such a Friend. Shall we not sing, and endeavor to make the song true,

"Now, my remnant of days
Would I spend to His praise,
Who hath died my poor soul to redeem; 
Whether many or few,
All my years are His due,
May they all be devoted to Him."
EDITORIAL No. 9

God Saves—His Children Should Obey

Paul was a wonderful teacher. In his letter to the church at Philippi he expresses his thanks to God for faithful and lovely brethren. In every prayer he prayed for them, "making request with joy" for their fellowship in the gospel from the first day he knew them in the Lord until then. "Fellowship in the gospel!"  What a blessing to have sweet fellowship one with another in the gospel of our once crucified, but now risen and exalted, Redeemer. 

And the Apostle put high valuation on such ties of spiritual love, for he knew that this love was one of the fruits that grew on trees made good by the regenerating Spirit of God. And knowing that God had begun a good work in the hearts and lives of those Philippian brethren he felt assured the work would be completed. God does not begin to work and then quit before the job is complete. He does not begin the sinner's salvation and then give over the work into the sinner's hand to complete. He does not work in partnership with the sinner in the work of the sinner's eternal salvation. 

We know that there is a sense in which God's children "are laborers together with God." (1 Cor. 3: 9). But not in the sense of joining their works with the work of the Lord in securing salvation from sin, for this salvation is "Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost." (Tit. 3:5). God's redeemed children are laborers together with him as his husbandry, and as His building. He has furnished the vineyard; they should follow the teaching and impression of his Spirit and so labor in his vineyard that they may bring forth fruit unto his praise. They should so let their light shine in his building—the Church—that others may see their good works and glorify their Father who is in heaven. In this sense, I think, "we are laborers together with God." But God began the work of our salvation, and it is a comfort to know that he will complete it. Thus Paul taught the Philippians, saying, "Being confident of this very thing, that he which hath begun a good work in you will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ." (Phil. 1: 6).
"Well," says the objector," if God begins the work of the sinner's salvation, and God completes that work, then what is there for the sinner to do?" The  objector sees no beauty in his plan of salvation; he finds no comfort in the doctrine of grace; he is seeking great things for himself and he wants a high seat in heaven. 

But there is something to do, yea much for God's children to do. Paul tells his brethren many things to do—more than they did, and more than we can do as we should. Listen to him, "If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels of mercies, Fulfil ye my joy." What was Paul's joy? Here it is; here are some of the things he rejoiced in: "That ye be likeminded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind." (Phil. 2: 1-2). He continues, "Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory; but in lowliness of mind let each esteem others better than themselves." Do you think there would be much trouble among God's children, if they would do as here taught? Here is a difficult task for us. 

But there is other work; "Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of others." Put yourself in the other man's place. Do unto others as you would have them do unto you. "Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling. For it is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure". He works in his children the will to serve him, and works in them the ability to serve him. Then "Do all things without murmurings and disputings; that ye may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God." "Let your moderation be known to all men." Some men have no moderation—they are ill-tempered, intemperate, and impatient. They are dangerous, and are troublemakers. Let us try to be peace-makers. 

"Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight and the sin which doth so easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith." (Heb. 12:1-2). He will care for us. Paul said, "My God shall supply all your needs according to his riches in glory by Jesus Christ." (Phil. 4: 19). 

Jehovah-jireh—the Lord will provide. He never fails to provide needful things for his faithful children. When Abraham was told to offer his son Isaac for a burnt-offering and staggered not at the command, but went about to do as bidden and withheld not his son, then it was that the Angel of the Lord called unto him out of heaven, saying, "Lay not thy hand upon the lad." Then it was that God provided the ram that was caught in the thicket, and Abraham called the name of that place Jehovah-jireh. Why? Because the Lord provided the sacrifice. So the words mean "God will provide." And have we not many times in our lives also been made to feel and to exclaim with our lips Jehovah-jireh because God made provision for us and supplied our need? 

Surely we experience such blessings all along the way and rejoice in the comforting thought that He reigns and rules and will be an ever-present help in time of need. "Let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach. For here we have no continuing city, but we seek one to come. By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips giving thanks to his name. But to do good and to communicate forget not: for with such sacrifice God is well pleased." (Heb. 13: 13-16.)
EDITORIAL No. 10

Some Remarkable Providences

In the April Advocate and Messenger my editorial in this series was devoted to evidences of God's providence in war. In this article I want to call attention to some remarkable providences of a personal nature. For while the blessed truths of the Scriptures point out the child of God, and assures him of his final salvation in heaven, yet it also assures him of his heavenly Father's care over him in this time state. 

He who notes the sparrows fall, and numbers the hairs of their head will not suffer them to be plucked from His hand. And Jesus said, "Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto you, That in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven." (Mat. 18: 10). Take heed! It is as if we offend the Master, to offend His little ones. He jealously guards and cares for them. 

He is not speaking of infants in age, but those who might be compared to such for their modesty and humility; those believers in Jesus who were mean in their own eyes, and mean and despised in the eyes of the world. We have such among us today—children in faith, and love and simplicity. Such are not striving for the mastery, not self appointed leaders, not seeking high positions in the Master's kingdom, but are willing to serve the Lord and his people in the most lowly and humble manner. They are God's jewels. He will gather them into His eternal kingdom when their service here is over. But the Master continues: "For I say unto you, that in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my Father." Their angels! Then these little ones-have the care of angels. They are cared for by a power higher than the power of man. These angels are ministering spirits unto them. They are their guardians, they encamp about them, and do many good offices for them. 

David said also: "This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles. The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivereth them." (Psa. 34: 6-7). What comfort to the poor, trembling child of grace to feel that when the night is dark, the wind of adversity blowing, and sorrows coming thick and fast, that God knows all about it, and will in some way deliver. "This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him." Blessed thought, the Lord always hears the cry of the poor and needy who look to Him. And He delivereth them that fear Him. 

Dear reader, do we fear Him? Fear to do wrong, fear to disobey His word, fear not to serve and honor Him the best we know. Do we have that filial, reverential fear of the Lord? If so, then let us rejoice and press on in the faithful, humble service of the Master, for "the angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him." Paul, in his letter to the church at Corinth (9th chapter) in giving instructions how the church should care for the pastor, asks the question, Doth God take care of oxen? Surely the Lord does, and even gave instruction by Moses how to treat oxen. "Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the ox that treadeth out the corn." If God is careful about oxen, is He not more careful about His pastors? Surely He will not let his people suffer who are appreciative of the pastors the Lord has sent them. "Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness ; and all these things shall be added unto you." "If God so clothe the grass of the field, which today is, and tomorrow is cast into the oven, shall he not much more clothe you, 0 ye of little faith?" 0 that all of us were more faithful and less selfish; more devoted and less doubtful. 

The apostle Peter says, "Yea, all of you be subject one to another, and be clothed with humility : for God resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble. Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time; casting all your care upon him: for he careth for you." (1 Pet. 5: 5-7).

Eld. S. Hassell published in The Gospel Messenger some years ago an account of many remarkable providences, some of which I am republishing below. He said, "Presentments, or previous feelings or anticipations of some dreadful thing in the future, seem to come from God, especially when they result in the saving of life. Several of such instances are related in the Guiding Hand." Read them.

A gentleman bought a ticket for a point on a railroad fifty miles distant. The train was on time, and he entered the car, and was sitting reading a paper in his hand, when the bell sounded the signal "all aboard." It sounded to him like a funeral bell tolling the death of a friend, and he involuntarily arose and left the coach as the train moved off. In two hours the news came that the train had met with a frightful accident, and that the coach in which he had been sitting was buried under the general ruin.

A man in Iowa, after dinner, left his family for the harvest field, passing by a spring, and filling his jug with fresh water. He had just begun to work when he suddenly dropped all, and said he must go home; and in doing so, he passed by the spring again, and was just in time to save the life of his darling and only child, who had followed him at a distance, and, in trying to "see the baby" in the water, had fallen into it.	

A gentleman was about making a pleasure trip on a river with some of his friends. Everything was ready, and he was just entering the boat, when his sister, a deaf mute, came suddenly and most anxiously running along, seized her brother's arm and coat, and tried to keep him back; but finding this unavailable, she threw herself at his feet, and, taking hold of his knees, expressed, by the most imploring gestures, her wish that he should not go on the trip. Touched by her painful and entreating expression and posture, several persons joined in the prayers of the poor unfortunate girl, and her brother finally yielded to their wishes. It was well that he did so, for the boat had gone but a short distance on the water when a sudden gust of wind capsized it. Several of the company found a watery grave; and he, who could not even swim, would probably have shared the same fate, if his sister, by some divine premonition, had not prevented his going.

A venerable minister in England once felt an unexpected desire, late at night, to visit a friend of is, whom he knew to be of a very melancholy turn of mind. Though extremely wearied of the cares and labors of the day, he could not resist the secret impulse. So he went, and strange to say, arrived just in time to prevent his friend from taking his own life. The nightly visit and friendly exhortations had such a wholesome effect on the depressed spirits of his friend that he never again attempted to commit suicide.

Professor Buchner, of Marburg, Prussia, being once in very pleasant company, felt a strong desire to go home and remove his bed from its old place to another corner of his bedroom. He yielded to the impulse. Having done so, he felt again at ease, and went back to his friends. During the night a large portion of the ceiling in the room, just where the bed formerly stood, crumbled down, and would have probably killed him if the bed had not been removed.

Many of our readers have no doubt known or heard of such wonderful intimations from a merciful Providence.

"0 that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men." "Whoso is wise, and will observe these things, even they shall understand the lovingkindness of the Lord." (Psa. 107: 8, 43).
EDITORIAL No. 11

Exhortation, With Other 
Remarkable Providences Related

The God we worship is a God of providence as well as a God of grace. "Behold, He that keepeth Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep." (Ps]. 121:4). David again said "In my distress I cried unto the Lord, and he heard me." He ever hears the cry of His children, and He will help them when all other help fails. He cannot fail. All power, both in heaven and in earth, is given unto Jesus. He is the Captain of our Salvation. He conquers all enemies. The last enemy is death. This enemy, Jesus also conquered. He rose a mighty conqueror over death, hell and the grave, and will bring off more than conqueror every one the Father gave him. 

And in this life, in this time state, He is not unmindful of us, and tells us to ask of him. "Ask and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you." If we as parents know how to give good gifts unto our children, "how much more shall your Father which is in heaven give good things to them that ask him." The wise parents do not give to the children every thing they ask for. The parents know better what is good for the child. And this human wisdom and human love is but a faint type of the wisdom of our heavenly Parent and the love He has for His children. 
Paul said "He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things." (Rom. 8: 32). If God gives us the greatest gift—the gift of his darling Son—will he withhold lesser gifts that his children need? 

David exclaims, "the Lord will give grace and glory; no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly.) Psa. 84: 11). Are we walking uprightly? Do we not sometimes suffer because of our evil deeds? God said, "If his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments, If they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments; then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquities with stripes." (Psa. 89:31-32)  
Peter said, "But let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an evildoer, or as a busybody in other men's matters." (1 Pet. 4: 15). I cannot for a moment believe, either from experience or from teaching of the Bible, that God's children always do as He bids them, that all they do is according to His will and they could not do otherwise. I believe they sometimes suffer as evildoers, and God does not predestinate, order or even tempt them to do evil. "Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God : for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempteth he any man." (Jas. 1: 13). 

I believe Old Baptists sometimes neglect their own duties and become busybodies in other men's matters and suffer for it. "Yet if any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed; but let him glorify God on this behalf." (1 Pet. 4: 16). Rather than be ashamed, we should rejoice if we suffer for the truth. Jesus said, "Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceedingly glad; for great is your reward in heaven." 

But before we rejoice, let us examine ourselves and be assured that the evil things said against us are false. If they should be true, we should hang our head in shame and mourn. But the Lord is good to us. Even when we disobey Him and bring reproach upon his dear name, his lovingkindness will not utterly fail. For surely "He has not dealt with us after our sins; nor rewarded us according to our iniquities." But "as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. For he knoweth our frame; he remembereth that we are dust." 

And His mercy "is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him, and his righteousness unto children's children; to such as keep his covenant, and to those that remember his commandments to do them." (Psa. 103:17-18).

But in this article I want to give some other remarkable providences that were published by Brother Hassell several years ago. I have reread them with pleasure and believe our readers will be edified and comforted in their perusal. The first is related of "The Lady and The Robber":

"In the early part of this century there lived, in a large, lonely house in the south of England, a lady whose only companions were two maid-servants. Though far away from all human habitations, they dwelt in peace and safety, for they trusted in God, and feared no evil under His protecting care. It was the lady's custom to pass around through the house with her maid-servants every night, and see that all the doors and windows were properly secured, and then to lie down and sleep in peace under the shadow of the Almighty, who was her trust and her shield. One night she had accompanied her maids about the house as usual, and having ascertained that all was safe, they left her in the passage close to her room, and then went to their own apartment, which was quite distant, at the other end of the house. 

As the lady, thus left alone, opened the door into her room, she distinctly saw the feet of a man under her bed. Her feelings may be imagined. Her servants were far away, and could not hear her if she called for help; she might be murdered before they could arrive, even if they did hear her; and if they were there, three weak and defenseless women would have been no match for an armed and desperate burglar. Danger was all around her; flight was impracticable; all earthly refuge seemed to fail. What then could she do? She did what it is always safe to do—she trusted in the Lord. She knew that she had a God to go to, who never leaves nor forsakes His people who confide in Him; and she possessed her soul in patience and in peace. Making no outcry, and giving no intimation that she had observed anything wrong, she quietly closed the door, locked it on the inside as she had been in the habit of doing, leisurely brushed her hair, seeking meanwhile the help and guidance of the Lord whom she served; and, putting on her dressing-gown, she took her Bible, and calmly sat down to read the word of God. Selecting under His guidance some such passage as the ninety-first Psalm, which recites the watchful care of the Lord over His people by night and by day, she read the words aloud. 

Never was a chapter so read before. In that lonely house, with a desperate robber hidden in the room, that helpless woman read out the mighty promises of Him whose word can never fail, and stayed her soul upon those assurances of divine protection which can not disappoint the hopes of the trusting children of the Most High. 

Her heart gained strength as she read the words of truth, and, closing the book, she kneeled and prayed to God, and prayed as she had never prayed before. She told the Lord of her helplessness and need; she commended herself and her servants in their defenselessness and loneliness to the care of a protecting God; she dwelt upon their utter lack of all human defense, and clung to the sacred promises which were given for comfort in the hours of trouble and distress. She lingered long in supplication, for it was her hour of need, and she came boldly to the throne of grace, for every other refuge was in vain. 

At last she rose from her knees, put out her candle and laid down upon her bed—but not to sleep. And how felt the wretched man during the time? He was bold, he was bad, he had companions near, and in his desperation was prepared for any struggle or for any crime; but how must he have felt to hear the promises of Almighty God read forth, and to listen to the pleading voice of that helpless woman, as she poured out her prayer to the God of her life!

Soon after the woman had laid down, she became conscious that the man was standing by her bedside. He spoke to her in a voice different, we may be sure, from his usual tone; begged her not to be alarmed, and said, "I came here to rob the house, and, if necessary, to kill you, and I have companions out in the garden ready to obey
my call for help. But after hearing the words you have read and the prayers you have uttered, no power on earth could induce me to hurt you or to touch a thing in your house. You must still remain perfectly quiet, and not attempt to interfere with me. I shall now give a signal to my companions which they will understand, and then we will go away, and you may sleep in peace, for I give you my solemn word that no one shall harm you, and that not the smallest thing belonging to you shall be disturbed. 

He then went to the window and opened it, and whistled softly, as a signal to his comrades to disperse to a distance, and returning to the bedside of the lady, who had neither spoken nor moved throughout the whole, he said, "Now I am going. Your prayer has been heard, and no disaster will befall you. But I never heard such words before; I must have the book you read out of." And taking her Bible, willingly enough given, you may be sure, he bade her good night, and disappeared through the open window.

Soon all became quiet, and the lady composed herself to sleep, upheld by that faith and grace which had so signally sustained her in her hour of trial and awoke in the morning to give thanks to Him who had preserved her from "the terror by night," and been to her a rock of refuge and a fortress of deliverance in her hour of need. 

Several years afterwards at a religious meeting in Yokshire, England, a man arose and told the story of that midnight scene, as a testimony to the effective, saving energy of the word of God applied by the Divine Spirit to the heart, and he said that under the influence of those wonderful words of truth and those pleadings of the distressed child of God, the robber was led to Christ for mercy and for salvation: and he said in conclusion, "I was that man." 

And immediately an elderly lady rose from her seat in the midst of the congregation, and quietly said,"It is all quite true; I was the lady," and sat down again. Many years had passed since the lady and the robber parted, and she had never heard anything further from him before that day. But the Lord had watched and guided, led and saved that sinful man, and he stood forth a monument of the wonderful providence and the saving grace of God. Thus, through the amazing mercy and grace of God, the helpless and trusting woman experienced a great natural deliverance in her hour of distress; and the wicked man realized a still greater spiritual salvation."

THE WIDOW'S NEED:-A reliable lady says, "One cold, stormy evening, my children were in bed, and I had seated myself with my work, when my husband came from his study and said, `Mary, I want you to take a basket and fill it with food for Mrs. L-.' 'Why!' I exclaimed, `I shouldn't dare to; it would never do; they have just moved here. She seems so proud and inclined to keep aloof from the neighbors; she would feel insulted. What could have put such an idea in your head? My husband replied, 'As I sat reading, the impression came to me so strongly that that woman was in need, I must help them. I can not shake it off. I will go with you.' With many remonstrances and objections on my part, a basket was filled with bread, meat, tea, coffee, and such things as my pantry afforded. I had previously been repelled by her distant and haughty manner and I dreaded to go on this errand. We went to the woman's door. In answering my knock, she led the way to the sitting room, and with much embarrassment I put down the basket and said a few kindly words. 

For a moment she stood still, white and trembling; then, bursting into tears, she told us her situation. With three little children, she was a widow with very scanty means, and this Saturday night she had put the last food she had on the table for supper `Then,' said she, went on my knees to the Lord and told Him all, and begged him to help me in my desolation. My father was a good old minister, and I believed that his God would not forsake me. While yet pleading with Him in prayer, the God of the widow and the fatherless heard my petition, and mercifully sent you to relieve the needs of myself and my poor little children.' "

THE POOR LITTLE STOWAWAY BOY, Who, even to save his life would not tell a lie: "On board an English steamer a little ragged boy, aged nine years, was discovered on the fourth day of the voyage out from Liverpool to New York, and carried before the first mate, whose duty it was to deal with such cases. When questioned as to his object in being hid on the ship, and who had brought him on board, the boy, who had a beautiful sunny face, that looked like the very mirror of truth, replied that his step-father did it, because he could not afford to keep him, nor pay his passage out to Halifax, where he had an aunt who was well off, and to whose house he was going. The mate did not believe the story, in spite of the winning face and truthful accents of the boy. He had seen too much of stowaways to be easily deceived by them, he said; and it was his firm conviction that the boy had been brought on board and provided with food by the sailors. The little fellow was very roughly handled in consequence. Day by day he was questioned and re-questioned, but always with the same result. He did not know a sailor on board, and his step-father alone had secreted him and given him the food which he ate. At last the mate, wearied by the boy's persistence in the same story, and perhaps a little anxious to inculpate the sailors, seized him one day by the collar, and dragging him to the forepart of the ship, told him that unless he told the truth, in ten minutes from that time he would hang upon the yardarm. He then made him sit down under it on the deck. All around him were the passengers and sailors of the mid-way watch; and in front of him stood the inexorable mate, with his watch in his hand, and the other officers of the ship by his side. It was a touching sight to see the pale, brave face of that noble boy-his head erect, his beautiful eyes bright— though the tears that suffused them. When eight minutes had fled, the mate told him he had but two minutes to live, and advised him to speak the truth and save his life. But he replied with the utmost simplicity and sincerity, by asking the mate if he might pray. The mate said nothing, but nodded his head, and turned as pale as a ghost, and shook with trembling like a reed in the wind. And then while all eyes turned on him, the brave and noble fellow—this poor boy whom society owned not, and whose own step-father could not care for—knelt with clasped hands and eyes upturned to heaven. There then occurred a touching scene somewhat like that of Pentecost. Sobs broke from strong, hard hearts as the mate sprang forward and clasped the boy to his bosom, and kissed him and praised him, and told him how sincerely he now believed his story, and how glad he was that he had been brave enough to face death, and be willing to sacrifice his life for the truth of his word." The God of truth was with this poor little friendless cast-a-way boy, and caused him to adhere to the truth, and the mate to believe him and to spare his life."

"Oh that men would praise the Lord for His goodness and for His wonderful works to the children of men." "Whoso is wise and will observe these things, even they shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord." Psa. 107: 8, 43.
EDITORIAL No. 12

Conclusion—Providences—Exhortation

During the year now coming to a close I have written, and published each month in The Advocate and Messenger, an editorial on the above subject. This is the twelfth and closing article. I realize, and so do the readers who have perused them, that the subject has only been touched upon. It can never be exhausted for God is in the Bible in the sense that every author is in his book, every builder in his building, every artist in his picture. All that we see, and hear and know—all that we can learn of nature; of man, his history and his destiny,—of the beginning of time and the end of years—of the past, the present, and the future; all is but the embodiment and revelation that God has made of himself. 

And the Bible is the Book of human speech of which God is the author. In it we learn of the origin of the universe, for there we read, "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth." There we read the history of events occurring during 4000 and more years of time. There we read the only perfect code of ethics ever written upon which are based the best laws of all civilized nations. And above all, there we are instructed in the knowledge of Christ—of his person, offices, grace, righteousness, obedience, sufferings, death, resurrection, and ascension. There we are told about the great salvation he came to obtain, and has obtained, and the characters for whom it was obtained. There we are perfectly instructed in the doctrines of grace, of pardon through the blood of Christ, atonement by his sacrifice, justification by his righteousness, acceptance by the Father in his Son, and eternal life through him. There we are informed of our duty, and how we ought to behave toward God and men. And there we learn of the "inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you, who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation ready to be revealed in the last time." (1 Pet. 1: 4-5). 

And there too, we read of God's wonderful providence over his people, and how through the faith He gave them they "subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens." How "Women received their dead raised to life again:" and how others were tortured, not accepting deliverance; that they might obtain a better resurrection;" and "others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover of bonds and imprisonment ; were stoned, sawn asunder, tempted, slain with the sword; and how some wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins; being destitute, afflicted, and tormented; "of whom the world was not worthy". (Heb. 11: 33-38).

And when we read of these things and compare our own blessings to the hardships and trials of others, who, were no doubt, far more worthy than ourselves, ought we not to love God more and serve him better? "Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men." But before closing this article I want to quote other remarkable providences that were published by Eld. Hassell some years ago. I think they are profitable and remind us that the same God who ruled and reigned in ages past rules and reigns today :

THE GOD OF THE FATHERLESS: A gentleman, walking along one of the streets of Philadelphia, was accosted by a boy who pleaded for a penny. The gentleman was at first inclined to send him away, but something in the boy's face forbade that, so he asked-'What do you want to do with a penny?' `Buy bread sir,' was promptly answered. `Have you had nothing to eat today?' `Nothing, Sir.' `Boy, are you telling me the truth?' asked the gentleman, looking him steadily in the face. `Indeed I am, sir.' 'Have you a father?' questioned the gentleman, now thoroughly interested in the boy. `No, sir; father is dead.' `where is your mother?' `She died last night. Come with me and I will show you where my mother is.' Taking the hand of the boy, the gentleman followed his guide down a narrow alley, and stopped before a miserable place which the boy called home.

Pushing open a door, he pointed to his dead mother, and said, 'There is my mother, sir.' `who was with your mother when she died?' asked the gentleman, deeply moved. `Nobody but me, sir.' `Did your mother say anything before she died?' `Yes, sir; she said, "God will take care of you, my son."

"Sooner than his dying mother had dared to hope, God had honored her faith by sending to her son one whose heart was touched with tenderest pity for her condition. The gentleman was a Christian, to whom God had intrusted much of this world's goods, and the little orphan was kindly cared for by him. God in His word is called the Father of the fatherless. He has said that none of them that trust in Him shall be desolate, and it is safe to trust in His promises."

THE MINISTER AND THE BEGGAR: "Some years ago an aged servant of the Lord, full of faith and the Holy Ghost, was, in company with two young ministers, on his way to a religious meeting. The eldest minister was noted for a willingness to bestow his last penny upon the needy, and for an unfaltering trust in God at all times and in all difficult places. On their journey they met a beggar who was in great want. The two young men were first appealed to for charity, but they gave nothing. For they reasoned, `Our means. are scant; we are to be all day on the road; we need our little money to buy a dinner for ourselves and for our horses.' But the old minister, Elder A., emptied the entire contents of his purse into the eager hands of the asker for alms. He trusted in God that He would deliver him, himself knew not how; and his astonished companions set themselves
to see in what way he was to be relieved from his dilemma. Noon came; an inn was reached, and all three called for dinner and food for their jaded horses. Now for the trial of faith. How was the servant of God, among strangers, without means or credit, to meet his bill? He who made the fishes of the sea to contribute money wherewith to pay His taxes knew; and His eyes were upon the man who dared to take God at His word and trust his Maker in every extremity. The order for dinner for man and beast was given without faltering, but the heart of the aged servant of God was in earnest prayer. The meal over, the younger men advanced first to the landlord and paid their reckoning, nearly exhausting their little purses, which in those days were not so well stocked with funds as are those of many preachers now. Then as boldly as the others, came Elder A., asking, 'What is my bill, landlord?' The landlord started, and looked at the questioner closely. `Are you Elder A., form M.?' he asked. `I am; that is my name', was the prompt reply. `Oh, nothing; I have no charge, never mind', said the landlord. `Stop', he added as the minister was about turning away. `Here, take this', and the drawer was pulled open and the very money paid in a minute before by the young men was placed in the hand of God's trusting servant, who went on his way with thanksgivings and praises. It is needless to say that those young preachers learned on that day a lesson which they never forgot. Reader, it is safe to trust God. It is better to trust God than to put confidence in the flesh or princes. 

The bank of Heaven will never suspend or fail, neither will its beneficent and wealthy Owner ever become bankrupt, nor will God's children ever run away with the money in His bank, nor will thieves break through and steal it. `There is that scattereth, and yet increaseth, and there is that withholdeth more than is meet, but it tendeth to poverty. The liberal soul shall be made fat, and he that watereth shall also be watered himself' (Prov. 11:24-25). `He that hath pity upon the poor lendeth unto the Lord, and that which he hath given will He pay him again' (Prov. 19:17). The times are growing perilous. Evil men and seducers wax worse and worse. Everything, earthly is uncertain. Put your money in the unfailing Bank of Heaven."

In closing this series of articles I would again beseech my readers to reverence and study the Bible, "For whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning, that we, through patience and comfort of the scriptures, might have hope. And "Now the God of patience and consolation grant you to be like-minded one toward another, according to Jesus Christ; that ye may with one mind and one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. (Rom. 15: 4-6). And in the end of life we shall realize that we have made no mistake, if we can with the poet, truly say:

"We've traveled together, my Bible and I,
In all kinds of weather, with smile or with sigh; 
In sunshine or sorrow, in tempest or calm,
Thy friendship's unchanging, my lamp and my psalm.

"We've traveled together, my Bible and I,
When life has grown weary, and death e'en was nigh; But all through the darkness of mist and of wrong, 
I found thus a solace, a prayer, and a song.

"So now who shall part us, my Bible and I?
Shall critics, or scoffers, or others who try?
Shall shadow for substance or stone for good bread Supplant thy sound wisdom, give folly instead?

"Ah, no, my dear Bible. Revealer of light,
Thou Sword of the Spirit, put error to flight;
And still through life's journey, until the last sigh, 
We'll travel together, my Bible and I"
APPENDIX

Below I republish from The Gospel Messenger of 1900 a Remarkable Providence; also several poems. These added items will, I feel, be read with comfort.

Remarkable Providence—Ann Young's Text

"Every beast of the forest is Mine, and the cattle upon a thousand hills." Psalm 1:10.

About the middle of the eighteenth century a poor, and hardworking couple lived in a thinly-settled part of Scotland, remote from town or village and several miles from any other habitation, and they found it very difficult at times to procure even the barest necessaries of life for themselves and their four little children. The Lord many times proved to them, by unexpected interpositions of His providence, that He is to His chosen ones who trust in Him "a very present help in trouble." 

At some miles distance from their humble cottage lived a wealthy and benevolent Christian woman, Lady Kilmarnock, who delighted to minister of her substance to the poor and needy. But though Ann Young (for that was the maiden name of the cottager's wife, and by it she was still known in that section) had been a servant in her family, yet she preferred to suffer want rather than to appeal to her or others for relief. On one occasion the provisions of the poor family gradually diminished until they were exhausted. Ann Young had given her children the last morsel of food, but having learned by her experience to trust in the loving-kindness of her God, she did not despond. The day passed slowly by, and no prospect of succor appeared. Night came at last, and still no relief came. The children cried for their supper, but there was none to give them, and their mother undressed them and put them to bed, where they soon cried themselves to sleep. 

Their father, much dejected, also went to bed, leaving the poor, sorrowing mother alone, and yet not alone, for the Lord was with her. Many sweet hours had she spent in that little cottage apart from the world, with her Bible and her God. Precious had these opportunities been to her of pouring out her soul to God—of spreading all her trials before Him, and giving vent to a full and now, alas! a heavy heart. Having replenished the peat fire on the hearth and trimmed and lighted the little iron lamp on the wall, she moved the clean oaken table near it, and from among the six or seven well-read, well-worn volumes on the bookshelf, she took a large Family Bible, and placed it upon the table. 

As she paused, before opening the sacred volume, to implore the Divine blessing on what she should read, the following text came involuntarily into her mind, "Every beast of the forest is mine, and the cattle upon a thousand hills." The text, she thought, is not very suitable to my present condition, and opening her Bible she proceeded to look out for some of her favorite passages of Scripture. But "Every beast of the forest is mine, and the cattle upon a thousand hills," was uppermost in her thoughts. 

She knelt down and tried to pray, and tried to recall former experiences, and to think of the promises of God, which used to come with power to her heart, but they brought no satisfaction now. The text, "Every beast of the forest is Mine, and the cattle upon a thousand hills," seemed to abide with her and to fill her mind. Yet, thought she, it is God's own word, and she then read the fiftieth Psalm in which the text is contained. It seemed to her a beautiful Psalm, but many other verses in it appeared to her more suited to her condition than the tenth verse, which she could not banish from her mind. 

She tried to pray again, and she read the Bible again, and kept thus praying and reading until midnight, and then thus continued until early dawn. When daylight appeared, she heard a loud, impatient rap at the door. "Who's there?" said Ann. "A friend," answered a voice outside. "But who is a friend?" she replied. "What are you?" "I'm a drover; and quick, mistress, and open the door, and come out and help me. And if there's a man in the house, tell him also to come out with all speed, for one of my cattle has fallen down a precipice and broken its leg, and is lying at your door." On opening the door, Ann was astonished to see a large drove of cattle from the Highlands of Scotland, being driven to the market in the south. The black moving mass filled the road in each direction as far as the eye could reach; and there at Ann's door lay a disabled beast, with its leg broken. After a few moments' thought and effort, it was found that nothing could be done to relieve the animal, and the drover, whose time was precious, made a present of it to the poor family. 

The father gathered his little family around him, and gave thanks to the Lord for this new proof of His loving-kindness to them. They had meat sufficient for many months to come, and in their first joy they totally forgot that they had no bread. But He who "commanded the ravens" to bring to the prophet "bread and flesh," did not forget it. God does not work by halves. About 6 o'clock in the morning another knock was heard at the door, which was quickly opened, when the steward of Lady Kilmarrock presented himself with a large sack of meal from his mistress, who he said had been incessantly thinking of Ann Young for a few days, and could not get her out of her mind, and who was satisfied that she was in want, though she would not make it known. The steward said that he fully intended to bring the meal the previous day, but, from having been unusually, busy, he did not find leisure to come, and therefore made it his first business that morning. Thus were the poor and trusting cottagers, by a wonderful interposition of Providence, amply provided for, and Ann Young found out why that passage of Scripture had been so impressed upon her mind, and learned to understand more fully than she did before, the meaning of that old and yet new and true and faithful word of God, "Every beast of the forest is Mine, and the cattle upon a thousand hills."

"I will bless the Lord at all times; His praise shall continually be in my mouth." Psa. 34: 1.

O Thou whose bounty fills my cup
With every blessing meet,
I give Thee thanks for every drop,
The bitter and the sweet.

I praise Thee for the desert road, 
And for the river-side;
For all Thy goodness hath bestowed, 
And all Thy grace denied.

I thank Thee for both smile and frown,
And for the gain and loss;
I praise Thee for the future crown, 
And for the present cross.

I thank Thee for the wing of love,
Which stirred my worldly nest, 
And for the stormy clouds that drove
The flutterer to Thy breast.

I bless Thee for the glad increase,
And for the waning joy,
And for this strange, this settled peace,
Which nothing can destroy.

Mrs. Jane Crewdson.

(Mrs. Crewdson was a daughter of George Fox, and was born in 1809, and died in 1863, near Manchester, England. She was greatly afflicted.)

HE IS MY SHEPHERD

He is my Shepherd, I His sheep;
I do not want to know 
Whether the way be soft or steep
By which I am to go,

If green and smooth the mountains be
I need not ask for more; 
If stony, He will carry me 
As He has done before.

He is my Shepherd, I His sheep;
We travel onward still.
By pools, where water-lilies sleep,
By many a quiet hill;
I feed in many a grassy dell,
I drink the waters clear;
The gracious Voice I know so well,
Is music to my ear.

He is my Shepherd, I His sheep;
I wandered once I know;
I heard Him on the mountains weep
That I should leave Him so.
I trembled, as I faintly guessed
A sorrow so divine,
For as He clasped me to His breast
The blood gushed forth on mine.

Shepherd, Good Shepherd! turn and see! 
I follow far behind,
Thy voice of mercy calling me, 
Comes borne on every wind.
Set wide Thy Father's open door, 
That I the light may see,
And in His house forevermore 
At last abide with Thee.

MY CHILD

The way is dark; My child; but leads to light,
I would not always have thee walk by sight. 
My dealings now thou canst not understand. 
I meant it so; but I will take thy hand
And through the gloom lead safely home My child!

The day goes fast, My child! But is the night
Darker to Me than day? In Me is light!
Keep close to Me, and every spectral band
Of fears shall vanish. I will take thy hand,
And through the night lead up to light My child!

The way is long, My child! But it shall be
Not one step longer than is best for thee,
And thou shalt know, at last when thou shalt stand 
Safe at the goal, how I did take thy hand, 
Lead quick and straight to heaven's gate My child!

The path is rough, My child! But oh! how sweet 
Will be the rest, for weary pilgrims meet, 
When thou shalt reach the borders of that land 
To which I lead thee, as I take thy hand, 
And safe and blest with Me shalt rest, My child!

The throng is great, My child ! But at thy side 

Thy Father walks; then be not terrified; 
For I am with thee; will thy foes command 
To let thee freely pass; will take thy hand,
And through the throng lead safe along My child!

The cross is heavy, child! Yet there was One 
Who bore a heavier for thee—My Son,
My well-beloved. For Him bear thine and stand 
With Him at last; and, from thy Father's hand 
The cross laid down, receive a crown, My child!
-Henry N. Cobb.
